begin privacy enhanced message proc type 2001,mic clear originator name webmaster www.sec.gov originator key asymmetric mfgwcgyevqgbaqicaf8dsgawrwjaw2snkk9avtbzyzmr6agjlwyk3xmzv3dtinen twsm7vrzladbmyqaionwg5sdw3p6oam5d3tdezxmm7z1t b twidaqab mic info rsa md5,rsa, nmffk fahfc7nlkkokdgqiojfmtugswdq k7gratfio5gm4j933pjhfe67 o 4m nmpkmrwmrza8 wql6f t5g 0000011860 00 000019.txt 20000310 0000011860 00 000019.hdr.sgml 20000310 accession number 0000011860 00 000019 conformed submission type 10 k public document count 14 conformed period of report 19991231 filed as of date 20000309 filer company data company conformed name bethlehem steel corp de central index key 0000011860 standard industrial classification steel works, blast furnaces rolling mills coke ovens 3312 irs number 240526133 state of incorporation de fiscal year end 1231 filing values form type 10 k sec act sec file number 001 01941 film number 564550 business address street 1 1170 eighth ave city bethlehem state pa zip 18016 7699 business phone 6106942424 mail address street 1 1170 eighth ave city bethlehem state pa zip 18016 7699 10 k 1 1999 securities and exchange commission washington, d. c. 20549 f o r m 10 k mark one x annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange of 1934 for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1999 transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 commission file number 1 1941 b e t h l e h e m s t e e l c o r p o r a t i o n exact name of registrant as specified in its charter delaware 24 0526133 state of incorporation i.r.s. employer identification no. 1170 eighth avenue bethlehem, pennsylvania 18016 7699 address of principal executive offices zip code registrant's telephone number, including area code 610 694 2424 securities registered pursuant to section 12 b of the act name of each exchange on title of each class which registered common stock 1 par value per share new york stock exchange chicago stock exchange preference stock purchase rights new york stock exchange chicago stock exchange preferred stock 1 par value per share 5.00 cumulative convertible new york stock exchange stated value 50.00 per share 2.50 cumulative convertible new york stock exchange stated value 25.00 per share 8 3 8 debentures. due march 1, 2001 new york stock exchange 8.45 debentures. due march 1, 2005 new york stock exchange securities registered pursuant to section 12 g of the act none indicate by check mark whether the registrant 1 has filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports , and 2 has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes x no indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10 k or any amendment to this form 10 k. x aggregate market value of voting stock held by non affiliates 773,237,742 the amount shown is based on the closing price of bethlehem common stock on the new york stock exchange composite tape on march 3, 2000. voting stock held by directors and executive officers of bethlehem is not included in the computation. however, bethlehem has made no determination that such individuals are affiliates within the meaning of rule 405 under the securities act of 1933. number of shares of common stock outstanding as of march 3, 2000 131,641,347 documents incorporated by reference selected portions of the 1999 annual report to stockholders of bethlehem steel corporation are incorporated by reference into part i and part ii of this report on form 10 k. selected portions of the 2000 proxy statement of bethlehem steel corporation are incorporated by reference into part iii of this report on form 10 k. part i item 1. business. bethlehem 1 manufactures and sells a wide variety of steel mill products and produces and sells coke and iron ore. the following table shows the percentage of net sales by major classes of product 1999 1998 1997 steel mill products hot rolled sheets 14.0 13.3 14.9 cold rolled sheets 19.0 16.8 17.2 coated sheets 30.8 28.6 31.5 tin mill products 7.2 6.7 7.4 plates 20.9 22.3 15.2 rail products  2.7 4.4 4.3 other steel mill products  2.6 4.5 5.5 other products and services including raw materials .. 2.8 3.4 5.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 operations bethlehem produces a wide variety of steel mill products including hot rolled, cold rolled and coated sheets, tin mill products, carbon and alloy plates, rail, specialty blooms, carbon and alloy bars and large diameter pipe. bethlehem's operations include the burns harbor division, the sparrows point division, bethlehem lukens plate and pennsylvania steel technologies, inc. bethlehem also has iron ore operations which provide raw materials to bethlehem's steelmaking facilities or sell such materials to trade customers , railroad and trucking operations which transport raw materials and semifinished steel products within various bethlehem operations and serve other customers on their lines and lake shipping operations which primarily transport raw materials to the burns harbor division . see item 2. properties of this report for a description of the facilities of these business units and operations. 1 bethlehem when used in this report means bethlehem steel corporation, a delaware corporation, and where applicable includes its consolidated subsidiaries. bethlehem was incorporated in delaware in 1919. 1 the following table shows production information for bethlehem and for the domestic steel industry. the information regarding the domestic steel industry is based on data from the american iron and steel institute aisi 1999 1998 1997 domestic steel industry raw steel production capability million of net tons  128.1 125.3 121.4 domestic steel industry raw steel production million of net tons  107.2 108.8 108.6 domestic steel industry average raw steel utilization rate 84 87 89 bethlehem's raw steel production capability million of net tons  11.3 10.9 10.5 bethlehem's raw steel production million of net tons  9.4 10.2 9.6 bethlehem's average raw steel utilization rate. 83 93 91 bethlehem's production as a percent of the domestic steel industry 8.8 9.4 8.9 preliminary of bethlehem's 1999 raw steel production, 86 percent was produced by basic oxygen furnaces and 14 percent by electric furnaces. bethlehem's operations are subject to planned and unplanned outages due to required maintenance, equipment malfunctions, work stoppages, various hazards including explosions, fires and severe weather conditions and the availability of raw materials, supplies, utilities and other items needed for the production of steel. these outages could result in reduced production and increased costs. markets the following table shows the percentage of the total net tons of steel mill products shipped by bethlehem to each of its principal markets, including shipments to its own manufacturing operations 1999 1998 1997 service centers, processors and converters 49.7 46.9 46.9 transportation including automotive 21.3 23.0 24.9 construction 12.9 12.1 11.0 containers 5.4 5.2 5.8 machinery 4.2 4.9 4.7 other 6.5 7.9 6.7 100.0 100.0 100.0 many of the markets bethlehem supplies, such as automotive, machinery and construction, are highly cyclical and subject to downturns in the u.s. economy. also, many of bethlehem's customers and suppliers are subject to collective bargaining agreements, and their ability to operate could be impacted by a strike or work stoppage. 2 bethlehem distributes steel products principally through its own sales organization, which has sales offices at various locations in the united states and mexico, and through foreign sales agents. in addition to selling to customers who consume steel products directly, bethlehem sells steel products to steel service centers, distributors, processors and converters. export sales were 3 percent of total sales in 1999, 4 percent in 1998 and 2 percent in 1997. trade orders on hand were about 1 billion at december 31, 1999, and 900 million at december 31, 1998. substantially all of the orders on hand at december 31, 1999, are expected to be filled in 2000. steel price sensitivity bethlehem's financial results are significantly affected by relatively small on a percentage basis variations in the realized prices for its products. for example, bethlehem shipped 8.4 million net tons of steel products and recorded net sales of 3.9 billion during 1999, implying an average realized price per ton of about 465. a one percent increase or decrease in this implied average realized price during 1999 would, on a pro forma basis, have resulted in an increase or decrease in net sales and pre tax income of about 40 million. competitive pressures in the steel industry are severe. these pressures could limit bethlehem's ability to obtain price increases or could lead to a decline in prices, which could have a material adverse effect upon bethlehem. competition the domestic steel industry is highly competitive. this competition affects the prices that bethlehem can charge for its products, the utilization of its production facilities, its ability to sell higher value products and ultimately its profitability. capacity. there is excess world capacity for many of the products produced by bethlehem. moreover, some foreign steel producers are owned, controlled or subsidized by foreign governments. decisions by these foreign producers to continue marginal facilities may be influenced to a greater degree by political and economic policy considerations than by prevailing market conditions. in addition, overcapacity has been perpetuated by the continued operation, modernization and upgrading of marginal domestic facilities through bankruptcy reorganization proceedings and by the sale of marginal domestic facilities to new owners, which operate such facilities with a lower cost structure. over the next several years, construction of additional production facilities could result in increased domestic capacity over 1999 levels. in particular, new domestic capacity in the plate and rail markets is expected to increase competition in these products where we now have a large domestic market share. electric furnace producers. domestic integrated producers, such as bethlehem, have lost market share in recent years to domestic electric furnace producers. these companies are relatively efficient, low cost producers that make steel from scrap in electric furnaces which are less expensive to build than integrated facilities , have lower employment and environmental costs per ton shipped and target regional markets. through the use of various higher quality raw materials and thin slab casting technology, electric furnace producers are increasingly able to compete directly with producers of higher value products, including cold rolled and coated sheets. imports. domestic steel producers also face significant competition from foreign producers and have been, and may continue to be, adversely affected by unfairly traded imports. in certain cases, foreign producers may be pricing their products below their production costs. imports of finished steel products accounted for about 22 percent of the domestic market in 1999, 27 percent in 1998 and 21 percent in 1997. 3 the following table, which is based on data reported by the aisi, shows the percentage of the domestic apparent consumption of steel mill products supplied by imports for various classes of products. 1999 1998 1997 rail  36 32 26 plates  17 29 21 tin mill products  20 16 15 hot rolled and cold rolled sheets.. 22 31 22 coated sheets  11 10 11 all products  26 30 24 preliminary excludes steel imported in the form of manufactured goods, such as automobiles, but includes semifinished steel. excluding semifinished steel, imports of steel mill products were about 27.1 million tons in 1999, 34.7 million tons in 1998 and 24.7 million tons in 1997. antidumping and countervailing duty orders covering imports of corrosion resistant sheet from six countries, cold rolled sheet from three countries and plates from 11 countries, which resulted from unfair trade cases filed by bethlehem and 11 other companies in 1992, remain in place. suspension agreements are also in place limiting the volume of cut to length plate from russia, the ukraine and the people's republic of china and setting a price floor for south africa for a five year period from 1998. in july, 1999, the commerce department entered into five year suspension agreements limiting the volume and setting a price floor for hot rolled sheet from brazil and russia. russia also entered into a comprehensive agreement to limit the volume of exports of other steel products from russia to essentially 1997 levels. in addition, an antidumping order covering hot rolled sheet from japan went into effect in july, 1999, and antidumping and countervailing duty orders covering cut to length carbon steel plate from six additional countries went into effect in january, 2000. in january, 2000, the department of commerce announced substantial final antidumping margins in investigations covering cold rolled sheet from 12 countries. an antidumping investigation is also pending on tin mill products from japan. for further information on trade related matters, see international steel trade under the year in review in bethlehem's 1999 annual report to stockholders. the major restructuring of the domestic steel industry, which began in the late 1970s and early 1980s, has removed the steelmaking capacity that once existed to meet market demand during peak periods. during the last few years, domestic producers have met a portion of the demand that exceeded steelmaking capacity by importing semifinished slabs for rolling into finished products in their own mills. substitute materials. for many steel products, there is substantial competition from manufacturers of products other than steel, including aluminum, ceramics, concrete, glass, plastic and wood. changes to the relative competitiveness of these substitute materials and the emergence of additional substitute materials could adversely affect future prices and demand for bethlehem's products. 4 capital expenditures capital expenditures were 557 million in 1999 compared with 328 million in 1998 and 228 million in 1997. capital expenditures for 2000 are currently estimated to be about 250 million. during 1998, bethlehem started construction of sparrows point's new continuous cold rolling mill complex. this complex, which is scheduled to begin production early in 2000, is expected to lower costs, improve quality and enhance capabilities. about 350 million of capital expenditures were authorized in 1999. at december 31, 1999, the estimated cost of completing authorized capital expenditures was about 410 million compared with 610 million at december 31, 1998. bethlehem expects to complete these authorized capital expenditures during 2000 to 2002. the domestic integrated steel industry is very capital intensive. as discussed under item 2. properties general of this report, bethlehem's principal operations and facilities are of varying ages, technologies and operating efficiencies. bethlehem will need to continue to make significant capital expenditures in the future to maintain and improve the competitiveness of its operations and facilities. environment bethlehem is subject to various federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations concerning, among other things, air emissions, waste water discharges and solid and hazardous waste disposal. during the five years ended december 31, 1999, bethlehem spent about 100 million for environmental control equipment. expenditures for new environmental control equipment totaled approximately 11 million in 1999, 13 million in 1998 and 15 million in 1997. the costs incurred in 1999 to operate and maintain existing environmental control equipment were approximately 115 million excluding interest costs but including depreciation charges of 14 million compared with 114 million in 1998 and 112 million in 1997. in addition, bethlehem has been required to pay various fines and penalties relating to violations or alleged violations of laws and regulations in the environmental control area. bethlehem paid about 74,000 in 1999, 910,000 in 1998 and 830,000 in 1997 for such fines and penalties. under the clean air act, as amended, coke making facilities will have to meet progressively more stringent standards over the next 25 years. bethlehem currently operates coke making facilities in burns harbor, indiana and lackawanna, new york. bethlehem will continue to evaluate the impact of future emission control regulations on its burns harbor and lackawanna operations but believes that these operations will be able to comply. bethlehem and federal and state regulatory agencies conduct negotiations to resolve differences in interpretation of environmental control requirements. in some instances, those negotiations are held in connection with the resolution of pending environmental proceedings. bethlehem believes there will not be any significant curtailment or interruptions of any of its important operations as a result of these proceedings and negotiations. bethlehem cannot predict the future specific environmental control requirements. based on existing and anticipated regulations under current legislation, bethlehem estimates that capital expenditures for new environmental control equipment will average about 15 million per year over the next two years. however, estimates of future capital expenditures and operating costs required for environmental compliance are subject to numerous uncertainties, including the evolving nature of regulations, possible imposition of more stringent requirements, availability of new technologies and the timing of expenditures. 5 under the resource conservation and recovery act, as amended rcra , the owners of certain facilities that managed hazardous waste after 1980 are required to investigate and, if appropriate, remediate certain historic environmental contamination found at the facility. all of bethlehem's major facilities may be subject to this corrective action program , and bethlehem has implemented or is currently implementing this program at its facilities located in steelton, pennsylvania lackawanna, new york burns harbor, indiana and sparrows point, maryland. at steelton, bethlehem completed a rcra facility investigation rfi , a corrective measures study cms and a remediation program approved by the united states environmental protection agency the epa and completed the remediation in 1994. at lackawanna, bethlehem is conducting an rfi. at burns harbor, bethlehem is conducting an rfi in accordance with an epa approved work plan that will require several years to complete. at sparrows point, bethlehem, the epa and the maryland department of the environment have agreed to a phased rfi as part of a comprehensive multimedia pollution prevention agreement which was entered by the u. s. district court for maryland on october 8, 1997. the potential costs for possible remediation activities, if any, at lackawanna, burns harbor and sparrows point and the timeframe for implementation of these activities cannot be reasonably estimated until the rfis, and possibly the cmss, have been completed and approved. at its former plant in bethlehem, pennsylvania, bethlehem is conducting remedial investigations pursuant to the pennsylvania land recycling brownfields program in conjunction with comprehensive redevelopment plans. these investigations are being performed with input and oversight from both the pennsylvania department of environmental protection and the epa region iii corrective action staff to ensure that the actions taken are acceptable to both state and federal regulatory authorities. bethlehem does not believe that the operations it acquired as part of the lukens merger in 1998 are subject to the rcra corrective action program and, therefore, any remediation associated with those facilities will be addressed as appropriate in the ongoing course of business. bethlehem may have some residual liability for remediation associated with historic lukens facilities or those that have been sold or shut down since the merger, but any such liabilities are not anticipated to be material. for example, the electric arc furnace flue dust disposal site at the coatesville, pennsylvania, facility that was discussed by lukens in its 1997 form 10 k is continuing to be investigated by bethlehem for remediation pursuant to the pennsylvania brownfields program. bethlehem does not have any information at this time suggesting that the 3 million liability that had been recognized by lukens for that site is not appropriate. under the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980, as amended cercla , also known as superfund , the epa can impose liability for site remediation on generators and transporters of waste, as well as past and present owners and operators of the sites where the waste was disposed of, regardless of fault or the legality of the disposal activities. bethlehem is actively involved at 24 sites where it has been advised that it may be considered a potentially responsible party under cercla or corresponding state superfund legislation. based on its experience regarding site remediation and its knowledge of and extent of involvement in such sites, bethlehem expects that its share of the costs for remediation of these sites will not be material. in its 1997 form 10 k, lukens discussed a cercla site douglassville in which it was involved. subsequent to that discussion, lukens and bethlehem were identified as separate de minimis potentially responsible parties and were signatories to a consent decree which was entered by the u.s. district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania on july 8, 1999. within 60 days following entry of the consent decree, bethlehem paid approximately 204,000 on behalf of lukens and 125,000 on behalf of bethlehem in full resolution of those liabilities. 6 although it is possible that bethlehem's future quarterly or annual results of operations could be materially affected by the future costs of environmental compliance, bethlehem believes that the future costs of environmental compliance will not have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial position or on its competitive position with respect to other integrated domestic steelmakers that are subject to the same environmental requirements. to the extent that competitors are not required to undertake equivalent costs, bethlehem's competitive position could be adversely affected. purchased materials and services bethlehem purchases about 3 billion per year of raw materials, energy, equipment, goods and services from commercial sources in about 40 countries. bethlehem's profitability could be affected by difficulties in obtaining these items and the prices paid for them. these difficulties could include such things as labor strikes, political instability and natural disasters. bethlehem made significant progress in 1999 through its strategic sourcing initiatives and expects further progress in 2000. see item 2. properties raw material properties and interests of this report for a further description of the sources of raw materials essential to bethlehem's steelmaking business. technology research and development. bethlehem performs research to improve existing products, develop new products and make operating processes more efficient. during 1999, 1998 and 1997, bethlehem spent about 21 million, 23 million and 22 million, respectively, for research and development. bethlehem owns a number of u.s. and foreign patents that relate to a wide variety of products and processes, has pending patent applications and is licensed under a number of patents. during 1999, seven u.s. patents covering a variety of new developments were awarded to bethlehem. however, bethlehem believes that no single patent or license or group of patents or licenses is of material importance to its overall business. bethlehem also owns registered trademarks for certain of its products and service marks for certain of its services which, unlike patents and licenses, are renewable so long as they are continued in use and properly protected. year 2000 computer issue. during the last five years, bethlehem focused on potential problems associated with the once common programming practice of storing data information using only the last two digits to indicate the year. the scope of bethlehem's year 2000 program involved many areas including its business and manufacturing computing systems, the associated personal computing, communications and infrastructure elements and the year 2000 readiness of key suppliers and customers. the major elements of the program were inventory, risk assessment, remediation, testing and contingency planning. as a result of its well planned approach, bethlehem experienced a smooth transition to the year 2000. during 1999, bethlehem completed the final phases of its year 2000 program and established command centers at each business unit and its corporate office to monitor all of its computer systems. bethlehem's employees in information technology and at the operations worked effectively with various providers to ensure that bethlehem was prepared for the changeover. during the transition period, bethlehem performed a thorough validation of all manufacturing and business systems. following this systematic review, all facilities resumed operations as scheduled. also, no material problems were encountered with bethlehem's key suppliers and customers. the costs associated with this effort were approximately 7 million and were charged to normal operating expenses. bethlehem achieved its objectives and continued to operate its business and manufacturing systems and to serve its customers with no adverse year 2000 impact. 7 employment at the end of 1999, bethlehem had about 15,500 employees, three quarters of whom are covered by agreements with the united steelworkers of america uswa . on august 1, 1999, bethlehem and the uswa entered into new five year labor agreements covering uswa represented employees at bethlehem's facilities in burns harbor, indiana lackawanna, new york sparrows point, maryland coatesville, pennsylvania and steelton, pennsylvania. the burns harbor and sparrows point divisions continue to be covered by one agreement, while separate agreements were continued for pst and blp's coatesville facility. a strike or work stoppage could impact bethlehem's ability to operate if it is unable to negotiate new agreements with its represented employees when the existing agreements expire. also, bethlehem's profitability could be adversely affected if increased costs associated with any future contract are not recoverable through productivity improvements or price increases. for further information on bethlehem's employment related matters, see employees and employment costs under financial review and operating analysis in bethlehem's 1999 annual report to stockholders. employee postretirement obligations at december 31, 1999, bethlehem had recorded a liability of 410 million for pensions. for further discussion of bethlehem's pension funding and obligations, see liquidity and capital structure under financial review and operating analysis in bethlehem's 1999 annual report to stockholders. bethlehem provides health care and life insurance benefits to most retirees and their dependents. most of these future benefits have not been funded and, therefore, bethlehem has substantial financial obligations on its balance sheet. at december 31, 1999, bethlehem had recorded a liability of 1,820 million for postretirement benefits other than pensions. to the extent competitors do not have similar obligations, bethlehem could be placed at a competitive disadvantage. also, increases in health care costs could adversely affect bethlehem's profitability. joint ventures, partnerships, facility sharing arrangements and mergers bethlehem has considered, and discussed with others, various opportunities for joint ventures, partnerships, facility sharing arrangements and mergers of all or part of bethlehem. bethlehem will continue to explore such opportunities. see item 2. properties. of this report for a description of joint ventures in which bethlehem participates. businesses exited in recent years, bethlehem has shut down or sold several facilities and operations. since 1996, bethlehem recorded net charges of 365 million in connection with these actions. on december 22, 1999, bethlehem completed the sale of its washington steel division facility in washington, pennsylvania, and on january 14, 2000, bethlehem completed the sale of its stainless sheet operations in massillon, ohio. as a result, bethlehem has now completed its planned divestiture of all of the stainless and distribution assets that were acquired as part of the lukens acquisition. if it becomes necessary for bethlehem to exit or reduce employment at additional businesses and operations in the future, it could incur substantial additional charges in the process. the charges for employees terminated as a result of facility shutdowns or sales vary depending upon the demographics of the workforce but could be 100,000 per employee. the 8 recording of these charges could have a material adverse impact on bethlehem's financial condition because of the increase in recorded liabilities, decrease in stockholders' equity and possible increases in required contributions to the pension fund and retiree health care payments. except as discussed above or previously announced, bethlehem does not currently anticipate any additional facility shutdowns. capital structure bethlehem's capital structure is highly leveraged. although bethlehem believes it has sufficient access to funds for the operation of its business, its existing obligations and below investment grade credit ratings may limit its ability to raise capital at reasonable cost and terms in the future. forward looking statements bethlehem and its representatives may from time to time make forward looking statements in reports filed with the securities and exchange commission, reports to stockholders, press releases, other written documents and oral presentations. these forward looking statements may include, among others, statements concerning projected levels of sales, shipments and income, pricing trends, cost reduction strategies, product mix, anticipated capital expenditures and other future plans and strategies. as permitted by the safe harbor provisions of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995, bethlehem is identifying in this report important factors that could cause bethlehem's actual results to differ materially from those projected in these forward looking statements. these factors include, but are not necessarily limited to the effect of planned and unplanned outages on bethlehem's operations the potential impact of strikes or work stoppages at facilities of bethlehem's customers and suppliers the sensitivity of bethlehem's results to relatively small changes in the prices obtained by bethlehem for its products intense competition due to world steel overcapacity, new domestic capacity over the next several years, low cost electric furnace facilities, imports especially unfairly traded imports and substitute materials the high capital requirements associated with integrated steel facilities the significant costs associated with environmental controls and remediation expenditures and the uncertainty of future environmental control requirements availability and prices associated with raw materials, supplies, utilities and other services and items required by bethlehem's operations employment matters, including costs and uncertainties associated with bethlehem's collective bargaining agreements, and employee postretirement obligations the effect of possible future closure or exit of businesses bethlehem's highly leveraged capital structure 9 the effect of existing and possible future lawsuits filed against bethlehem. item 1. business and item 3. legal proceedings of this report discuss these factors in more detail and are incorporated by reference into this section. bethlehem does not undertake to update any forward looking statements that may be made from time to time by bethlehem or its representatives. item 2. properties. burns harbor division location in indiana, on lake michigan, about 50 miles southeast of chicago, illinois. principal products and markets hot rolled, cold rolled, electrogalvanized, hot dip galvanized and galvannealed sheet, coke and semifinished steel to bethlehem lukens plate. its principal markets include automotive, service centers, construction, machinery and appliance. principal facilities a sintering plant, a coke oven battery burns harbor operates a second coke oven battery for the battery's owner , two blast furnaces, including coal injection facilities, three basic oxygen furnaces with a combined annual raw steel production capability of about 5.6 million tons, a vacuum degassing facility, two continuous slab casters with a combined annual production capability of about 4 million tons, an 80 inch hot strip mill, two continuous pickling lines, an 80 inch five stand cold reducing mill, sheet finishing mills, a continuous heat treating line, batch annealing facilities and a 72 inch hot dip galvanizing line. burns harbor operates a cold reducing mill, a continuous pickling line, a galvanizing line and two coke oven batteries in lackawanna, new york. burns harbor continuously casts about 88 percent of its total production volume, with the remaining 12 percent being ingot cast. ingot cast slabs are used primarily by bethlehem to make steel plates. burns harbor's utilization of raw steel production capability was 95 percent during 1999. sparrows point division location on the chesapeake bay, near baltimore, maryland. principal products and markets hot rolled, cold rolled, hot dip galvanized and galvalume r sheet and tin mill products. its principal markets include construction, containers and service centers. principal facilities a sintering plant, a large blast furnace, two basic oxygen furnaces with an annual raw steel production capability of about 3.7 million tons, a two strand continuous slab caster, a 68 inch hot strip mill, three continuous pickling lines, three cold reducing mills 66 inch, 56 inch and 48 inch , continuous and batch annealing facilities, two galvanizing lines, a galvalume r line, a 48 inch hot dip galvanizing galvalume r line and tin mill facilities that include tin and chrome plating lines. sparrows point continuously casts essentially 100 percent of its total production volume. sparrows point's utilization of raw steel production capability was 76 percent during 1999. utilization was lower than in previous years because of the reline of the l blast furnace. 10 bethlehem lukens plate blp location in coatesville and conshohocken, pennsylvania burns harbor, indiana. principal products and markets carbon plate, high strength, low alloy plate, commercial alloy plate, military alloy plate, coiled and cut plate and clad plate. its principal markets include service centers, transportation, infrastructure, machinery, equipment, environmental and engineering. principal facilities coatesville an electric arc furnace with an annual raw steel production capability of about 900,000 tons, two plate mills 140 inch and 206 inch and heat treating facilities. conshohocken a 110 inch steckel mill, two reheat furnaces, a roughing mill, an in line cooling and cut to length line, a quench and temper line and a batch heat treating system. burns harbor a 50 x 90 inch slabbing mill, a 110 inch sheared plate mill including two continuous reheat furnaces, a roughing mill, a finishing mill and a normalizing furnace, and a 160 inch sheared plate mill including two continuous reheat furnaces, four batch reheat furnaces, a roughing mill, a finishing mill, an in line accelerated cooling facility, a quench and temper line and a batch normalizing furnace. bethlehem lukens plates' utilization of raw steel production capability was 91 percent during 1999. during 2000, bethlehem intends to consolidate burns harbor, sparrows point and blp into two divisions. blp's operations in coatesville and conshohocken will become part of sparrows point and blp's facilities located at burns harbor will become part of that division. bethlehem will continue to market its plate products under the name bethlehem lukens plate. pennsylvania steel technologies, inc. pst location in steelton, pennsylvania, south of harrisburg, pennsylvania. principal products and markets railroad rails, specialty blooms and flat bars. pst also produces large diameter pipe for the oil and gas industries. principal facilities a dc electric arc furnace with an annual raw steel production capability of about 1.1 million tons, a ladle furnace, a vacuum degassing facility, a continuous bloom caster, a 44 inch blooming mill, a 28 inch rail mill, in line rail head hardening facilities, finishing and shipping facilities for long length 80 foot rails, a 20 inch bar mill and an electric fusion welded pipe mill. pst's utilization of raw steel production capability was 42 percent during 1999. joint ventures bethlehem participates in the following joint ventures double g coatings company, l.p. located near jackson, mississippi operates a 270,000 ton per year sheet coating line that produces galvanized and galvalume r coated sheets primarily for the construction market. sparrows point provides cold rolled coils for about half of double g's annual capability and is responsible for marketing its share of the finished product. 11 columbus coatings company located in columbus, ohio a joint venture with the ltv corporation. the coating facility is expected to begin operation by fourth quarter 2000 and will produce quality corrosion resistant steel sheets primarily for the automotive market. columbus processing company llc. located in columbus, ohio steel slitting and warehousing operation. steel construction systems located in orlando, florida a joint venture with csr rinker, the largest building materials company in florida. steel construction systems manufactures steel studs and joists for residential and light commercial buildings. walbridge coatings located in walbridge, ohio owns and operates a 400,000 ton per year electrogalvanizing line. this facility produces corrosion resistant sheet steel primarily for the automobile industry and other consumer durables markets. burns harbor provides cold rolled coils for 85 percent of walbridge's annual capability and is responsible for marketing its share of the finished product. indiana pickling and processing company located in northern indiana operates a pickling line. chicago cold rolling, l.l.c. located in northern indiana processes hot rolled sheet into cold rolled sheet products. twb company located in michigan operates the largest plant in north america producing laser welded blanks for the automotive industry. metalsite www.metalsite.net bethlehem is an equity partner in metalsite, an internet metals marketplace where companies can buy or sell metal products or services. bethlehem roll technologies llc located in sparrows point, maryland operates a facility for grinding steel mill rolls for bethlehem and others. bethnova tube, llc site location not yet determined will produce tubes for use in hydroforming automobile and truck parts. tube production is expected to begin in the first quarter of 2001. bethlehem also has indirect equity interests in various iron ore properties. see raw material properties and interests below. raw material properties and interests iron ore. bethlehem has indirect equity interests in various iron ore operating properties, which excluding tonnages applicable to interests owned by others it estimates contained recoverable reserves at december 31, 1999, sufficient to produce at least 16 million tons of direct shipping iron ore from properties located in brazil and 186 million tons of iron ore pellets from properties located in minnesota. during 1997, bethlehem sold its equity interest in iron ore company of canada ioc . bethlehem continues as a customer of ioc and purchases iron ore at prices which approximate market. in addition to the estimated reserves at operating properties, bethlehem also has indirect equity interests in undeveloped or nonoperating iron ore properties, which excluding tonnages applicable to interests owned by others it estimates 12 contained recoverable reserves at december 31, 1999, sufficient to produce at least 11 million tons of direct shipping iron ore from properties located in brazil and 128 million tons of iron ore pellets from properties located in minnesota. the iron ore operating properties in which bethlehem has interests have mining and processing facilities which can supply a majority of bethlehem's current annual iron ore requirements. the location of bethlehem's steel operations and the iron ore products best suited to these facilities determine when bethlehem sells, exchanges or purchases iron ore. these purchases have been from various sources, including sources in which it has ownership interests, under a variety of arrangements. bethlehem's share of the annual iron ore production by enterprises in which it has ownership interests, for bethlehem's use or sale to trade customers, was 6.9 million tons in 1999 and 7.9 million tons in 1998. in addition to these sources, bethlehem purchased 4 million tons of iron ore in 1999 and 5.1 million tons of iron ore in 1998 from sources in which it had no ownership interests. in 1999, bethlehem obtained about 62 percent of its iron ore requirements from operations in which it had ownership interests compared with 58 percent in 1998. iron ore trade sales commitments for 2000 are .3 million tons and no sales commitments exist beyond 2000. the interests in foreign iron ore properties described above are subject to the risks associated with investments in foreign countries, including the risk of nationalization. coal and coke. bethlehem has sold all of its coal operating properties and purchases all of the coal it uses from commercial sources. bethlehem owns undeveloped or nonoperating coal properties in pennsylvania, which it estimates contained recoverable reserves at december 31, 1999, sufficient to produce at least 158 million tons of coal, of which about 91 percent and 9 percent, respectively, are metallurgical and steam coal. bethlehem operates coke making facilities at burns harbor, indiana and lackawanna, new york. other raw materials. bethlehem purchases its other raw material requirements from commercial sources. transportation bethlehem owns nine subsidiary shortline railroads which transport raw materials and semifinished steel products within various bethlehem operations and serve other customers on their lines. bethlehem manages an interstate trucking company serving bethlehem's operations and other facilities and manages a rail truck intermodal facility in bethlehem, pennsylvania. the burns harbor division operates two 1,000 foot ore vessels one owned and one under long term charter , which are used for the transportation of iron ore on the great lakes. general while bethlehem's principal operations and facilities are adequately maintained, they are of varying ages, technologies and operating efficiencies. bethlehem believes that most of its operations and facilities currently are competitive with the operations and facilities of its principal competitors. bethlehem will continue to make capital expenditures to improve and maintain the competitiveness of its operations and facilities. see item 1. business capital expenditures of this report for a discussion of bethlehem's capital expenditures. 13 bethlehem owns all principal operations and facilities. during 1998, bethlehem sold its no. 1 coke oven battery at burns harbor to an affiliate of dte energy services, inc. bethlehem operates the facility for the owner and purchases its output. bethlehem financed the construction of two hot dip galvanizing lines at its burns harbor and sparrows point divisions. these two galvanizing lines are pledged as collateral for the borrowings. item 3. legal proceedings. bethlehem is a party to numerous legal proceedings incurred in the ordinary course of its business. bethlehem cannot predict with any certainty the outcome of any legal proceedings to which it is a party. however, in the opinion of bethlehem's management, adequate reserves have been recorded for losses which are likely to result from these proceedings. to the extent that such reserves prove to be inadequate, bethlehem would incur a charge to earnings which could be material to its future results of operations in particular quarterly or annual periods. the outcome of these proceedings, however, is not currently expected to have a material adverse effect on bethlehem's consolidated financial position. see item 1. business environment of this report for a discussion of bethlehem's potential responsibilities for environmental cleanup at certain sites under rcra and cercla. item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders. there were no matters submitted to a vote of security holders during the fourth quarter of 1999. 14 executive officers of the registrant. the executive officers of bethlehem as of march 3, 2000, are as follows name age position curtis h. barnette 65 chairman and chief executive officer gary l. millenbruch 62 vice chairman and chief financial officer duane r. dunham 58 president and chief operating officer dr. augustine e. moffitt, jr. 54 executive vice president administration and chief administrative officer leonard m. anthony 45 treasurer lonnie a. arnett 54 vice president accounting , controller and chief accounting officer dr. walter n. bargeron 57 president, burns harbor division david m. beinner 60 senior vice president commercial thomas j. conarty, jr. 50 vice president information technology and chief information officer stephen g. donches 54 vice president public affairs andrew r. futchko 57 president, pennsylvania steel technologies, inc. william h. graham 54 senior vice president law , general counsel and secretary carl w. johnson 58 president, sparrows point division john l. kluttz 57 vice president union relations dr. carl f. meitzner 60 vice president planning van r. reiner 51 president, bethlehem lukens plate dr. malcolm j. roberts 57 vice president technology and chief technology officer robert a. rudzki 46 vice president purchasing and transportation and chief procurement officer dorothy l. stephenson 50 vice president human resources 15 all of the executive officers have held responsible management or professional positions with bethlehem or its subsidiaries for more than the past five years. bethlehem's by laws provide that the board of directors annually chooses the officers and that each officer holds office until his or her successor is elected, or his or her death, resignation or removal. 16 part ii item 5. market for the registrant's common stock and related security holder matters. as of march 3, 2000, about 32,850 stockholders held 131,641,347 shares of bethlehem common stock. the principal market for bethlehem common stock is the new york stock exchange. bethlehem common stock is also listed on the chicago stock exchange. dividends on bethlehem common stock are paid quarterly when declared by bethlehem's board of directors. under the provisions of bethlehem's 10 3 8 senior notes due 2003, bethlehem's ability to pay dividends on its common stock is restricted. see note j to the consolidated financial statements. at december 31, 1999, about 280 million was available for the payment of common stock dividends under these provisions. bethlehem has not paid a dividend on its common stock since the fourth quarter of 1991. bethlehem's board of directors will determine whether to pay any future dividends subject to any applicable restrictions based on attained financial results and business outlook. the following table shows the high and low sales prices of bethlehem common stock as reported in the consolidated transaction reporting system. the closing sale price of bethlehem common stock on march 3, 2000, was 6.00. 1999 1998 sales prices sales prices period high low high low first quarter 10.688 7.688 15.500 8.063 second quarter 10.938 7.375 17.125 11.063 third quarter 8.688 6.750 13.438 7.000 fourth quarter 8.500 5.875 10.750 7.313 item 6. selected financial data. the information required by this item is incorporated by reference from page 31 of bethlehem's 1999 annual report to stockholders. item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. the information required by this item is incorporated by reference from pages 2 to 9 and 12 to 15 of bethlehem's 1999 annual report to stockholders. 