item 1a. risk factors our business, financial condition, results of operations and the trading price of our securities can be materially and adversely affected by many events and conditions, including the following risks associated with our company we may fail to acquire additional businesses, which will restrict our growth and may have a material adverse effect on our stock price or on our ability to meet our obligations under and the price of our securities. our business strategy is to acquire companies operating in the oilfield services industry. however, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring any additional companies. successful acquisition of new companies will depend on various factors, including but not limited to our ability to obtain financing the competitive environment for acquisitions and the integration and synergy issues described in the next risk factor. there can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire and successfully operate any particular business or that we will be able to expand into areas that we have targeted. if we fail to acquire additional businesses, our financial condition, our results of operations, the price of our common stock and our ability to meet our obligations under long term notes may be materially adversely affected. difficulties in integrating acquired businesses may result in reduced revenues and income. we may not be able to successfully integrate the businesses of our operating subsidiaries or any business we may acquire in the future. the integration of the businesses will be complex and time consuming, will 13 table of contents place a significant strain on management and our information systems, and this strain could disrupt our businesses. furthermore, if our combined businesses continue to grow rapidly, we may be required to replace our current information and accounting systems with systems designed for companies that are larger than ours. we may be adversely impacted by unknown liabilities of acquired businesses. we may encounter substantial difficulties, costs and delays involved in integrating common accounting, information and communication systems, operating procedures, internal controls and human resources practices, including incompatibility of business cultures and the loss of key employees and customers. these difficulties may reduce our ability to gain customers or retain existing customers, and may increase operating expenses, resulting in reduced revenues and income and a failure to realize the anticipated benefits of acquisitions. in particular, the specialty, dls and ogr acquisitions are our largest acquisitions to date and, consequently, the inherent integration risks may have a greater effect on us than the risks posed by our previous acquisitions. we will be conducting parts of the integration of these companies simultaneously, and as a result we could strain our current resources. furthermore, we will depend on these entities continued performance as a source of cash flow to service our debt obligations. we have made numerous acquisitions during the past five years. as a result of these transactions, our past performance is not indicative of future performance, and investors should not base their expectations as to our future performance on our historical results. our acquisition of dls has substantially changed the nature of our operations and business. our acquisition of dls has substantially changed the nature and geographic location of our operations and business as a result of the character and location of dls businesses, which have substantially different operating characteristics and are in different geographic locations from our other businesses. prior to our acquisition of dls, we had operated as an oilfield services company domestically in texas, louisiana, new mexico, colorado, oklahoma, mississippi, utah, wyoming, offshore in the gulf of mexico, and internationally in mexico. dls business is located primarily in argentina, and we have no significant operations in south america other than through dls. accordingly, this acquisition has subjected and will continue to subject us to risks inherent in operating in a foreign country where we do not have significant prior experience. dls business consists of employing drilling and workover rigs for drilling, completion and repair services for oil and gas wells. we do not own any drilling rigs or workover rigs other than through dls, and have not historically provided such services prior to our acquisition of dls. consequently, we may not be able to realize the economic benefits of this acquisition as efficiently as in our prior acquisitions, if at all. failure to maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures and or internal controls over financial reporting could have a material adverse effect on our operations. as part of our growth strategy, we have recently completed several acquisitions of privately held businesses, including closely held entities, and in the future, we may make additional strategic acquisitions of privately held businesses. prior to becoming part of our consolidated company, these acquired businesses have not been required to implement or maintain the disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls over financial reporting that federal law requires of publicly held companies such as ours. similarly, it is likely that our future acquired businesses will not have been required to maintain such disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls prior to their acquisition. likewise, upon the completion of any future acquisition, we will be required to integrate the acquired business into our consolidated company s system of disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over financial reporting, but we cannot assure you as to how long the integration process may take for any business that we may acquire. furthermore, during the integration process, we may not be able to fully implement our consolidated disclosure controls and internal controls over financial reporting. with respect to our acquisition of dls and our recent acquisition of substantially all of the assets of ogr, this risk is exacerbated by each of dls and ogr s relative size, when compared to the rest of our consolidated company. likewise, during the course of our integration of any acquired business including dls and ogr , we may identify needed improvements to our or such acquired business internal controls and may be required to design enhanced processes and controls in order to make such improvements. this could result in significant 14 table of contents delays and costs to us and could require us to divert substantial resources, including management time, from other activities. if we fail to achieve and maintain the adequacy of our disclosure controls and procedures and or our internal controls, as such standards are modified, supplemented or amended from time to time, we may not be able to conclude that we have effective disclosure controls and procedures and or effective internal controls over financial reporting in accordance with section 404 of the sarbanes oxley act. if we are not successful in improving our financial reporting process, our disclosure controls and procedures and or our internal controls over financial reporting we identify deficiencies and or one or more material weaknesses in our internal controls over financial reporting or we are not successful in integrating acquired businesses such as dls and ogr into our consolidated company s system of disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over financial reporting, then our independent registered public accounting firm may be unable to attest that our management s assessment of our internal controls over financial reporting is fairly stated, or they may be unable to express an opinion on our management s evaluation of, or on the effectiveness of, our internal controls. if it is determined that our disclosure controls and procedures and or our internal controls over financial reporting are not effective and or we fail to satisfy the requirements of section 404 of the sarbanes oxley act on a timely basis, we may not be able to provide reliable financial and other reports or prevent fraud, which, in turn, could harm our business and operating results, cause investors to lose confidence in the accuracy and completeness of our financial reports, have a material adverse effect on the trading price of our common stock and or adversely affect our ability to timely file our periodic reports with the sec. any failure to timely file our periodic reports with the sec may give rise to a default under the indentures governing our outstanding 9.0 senior notes due 2014, and our outstanding 8.5 senior notes due 2017 which we refer to collectively as our outstanding senior notes and any other debt securities we may offer and, ultimately, an acceleration of amounts due thereunder. in addition, a default under the indentures generally will also give rise to a default under our credit agreement and could cause the acceleration of amounts due under the credit agreement. if an acceleration of our outstanding senior notes or our other debt were to occur, we cannot assure you that we would have sufficient funds to repay such obligations. historically, we have been dependent on a few customers operating in a single industry the loss of one or more customers could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. our customers are engaged in the oil and natural gas drilling business in the united states, mexico and elsewhere. historically, we have been dependent upon a few customers for a significant portion of our revenues. in 2006, one of our customers, pan american energy represented 11.7 of our consolidated revenues. in 2005, no single customer generated over 10 of our revenues. in 2004, matyep represented 10.8 of our revenues, and burlington resources represented 10.1 of our revenues. additionally, dls currently relies on one customer for a majority of its revenue. in 2006, pan american energy represented 51.9 of dls revenues. in 2005, pan american energy represented 55 of dls revenues. this concentration of customers may increase our overall exposure to credit risk, and customers will likely be similarly affected by changes in economic and industry conditions. our financial condition and results of operations will be materially adversely affected if one or more of our significant customers fails to pay us or ceases to contract with us for our services on terms that are favorable to us or at all. our international operations may expose us to political and other uncertainties, including risks of terrorist acts, war and civil disturbances changes in laws or policies regarding the award of contracts and the inability to collect or repatriate currency, income, capital or assets. part of our strategy is to prudently and opportunistically acquire businesses and assets that complement our existing products and services, and to expand our geographic footprint. if we make acquisitions in other countries, we may increase our exposure to the risks discussed above. 15 table of contents environmental liabilities could result in substantial losses. since our reorganization under the u.s. federal bankruptcy laws in 1988, a number of parties, including the environmental protection agency, have asserted that we are responsible for the cleanup of hazardous waste sites with respect to our pre bankruptcy activities. we believe that such claims are barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and we have not experienced any material expense in relation to any such claims. however, if we do not prevail with respect to these claims in the future, or if additional environmental claims are asserted against us relating to our current or future activities in the oil and natural gas industry, we could become subject to material environmental liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. products liability claims relating to discontinued operations could result in substantial losses. since our reorganization under the u.s. federal bankruptcy laws in 1988, we have been regularly named in products liability lawsuits primarily resulting from the manufacture of products containing asbestos. in connection with our bankruptcy, a special products liability trust was established to address products liability claims. we believe that claims against us are barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and that the products liability trust will continue to be responsible for products liability claims. since 1988, no court has ruled that we are responsible for products liability claims. however, if we are held responsible for product liability claims, we could suffer substantial losses that could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. we have not manufactured products containing asbestos since our reorganization in 1988. we may be subject to claims for personal injury and property damage, which could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. our products and services are used for the exploration and production of oil and natural gas. these operations are subject to inherent hazards that can cause personal injury or loss of life, damage to or destruction of property, equipment, the environment and marine life, and suspension of operations. litigation arising from an accident at a location where our products or services are used or provided may cause us to be named as a defendant in lawsuits asserting potentially large claims. we maintain customary insurance to protect our business against these potential losses. our insurance has deductibles or self insured retentions and contains certain coverage exclusions. however, we could become subject to material uninsured liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. the loss of key executives would adversely affect our ability to effectively finance and manage our business, acquire new businesses, and obtain and retain customers. we are dependent upon the efforts and skills of our executives to finance and manage our business, identify and consummate additional acquisitions and obtain and retain customers. these executives include chief executive officer and chairman munawar h. hidayatallah and vice chairman, president and chief operating officer burt a. adams. in december 2006, david wilde resigned as our president and chief operating officer. in light of mr. wilde s significant contributions to our recent growth, his resignation could have a material adverse effect on our future performance. in addition, our development and expansion will require additional experienced management and operations personnel. no assurance can be given that we will be able to identify and retain these employees. the loss of the services of one or more of our key executives could increase our exposure to the other risks described in this risk factors section. we do not maintain key man insurance on any of our personnel. 16 table of contents risks associated with our industry cyclical declines in oil and natural gas prices may result in reduced use of our services, affecting our business, financial condition and results of operations and our ability to meet our capital expenditure obligations and financial commitments. the oil and natural gas exploration and drilling business is highly cyclical. generally, as oil and natural gas prices decrease, exploration and drilling activity declines as marginally profitable projects become uneconomic and are either delayed or eliminated. declines in the number of operating drilling rigs result in reduced use of and prices for our services. accordingly, when oil and natural gas prices are relatively low, our revenues and income will suffer. oil and natural gas prices depend on many factors beyond our control, including the following economic conditions in the united states and elsewhere changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas the level of production of the organization of petroleum exporting countries, commonly called opec the level of production of non opec countries the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other oil and natural gas producing activities the level of global oil and natural gas inventories and advances in exploration, development and production technologies. depending on the market prices of oil and natural gas, companies exploring for oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their drilling programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling services. our contracts are generally short term, and oil and natural gas companies tend to respond quickly to upward or downward changes in prices. any reduction in the demand for drilling services may materially erode both pricing and utilization rates for our services and adversely affect our financial results. as a result, we may suffer losses, be unable to make necessary capital expenditures and be unable to meet our financial obligations. our industry is highly competitive, with intense price competition. the markets in which we operate are highly competitive. contracts are traditionally awarded on a competitive bid basis. pricing is often the primary factor in determining which qualified contractor is awarded a job. the competitive environment has intensified as recent mergers among oil and natural gas companies have reduced the number of available customers. many other oilfield services companies are larger than we are and have resources that are significantly greater than our resources. these competitors are better able to withstand industry downturns, compete on the basis of price and acquire new equipment and technologies, all of which could affect our revenues and profitability. these competitors compete with us both for customers and for acquisitions of other businesses. this competition may cause our business to suffer. we believe that competition for contracts will continue to be intense in the foreseeable future. we may experience increased labor costs or the unavailability of skilled workers and the failure to retain key personnel could hurt our operations. companies in our industry, including us, are dependent upon the available labor pool of skilled employees. we compete with other oilfield services businesses and other employers to attract and retain qualified personnel with the technical skills and experience required to provide our customers with the highest quality service. we are also subject to the fair labor standards act, which governs such matters as minimum wage, overtime and other working conditions. a shortage in the labor pool of skilled workers or other general inflationary pressures or changes in applicable laws and regulations could make it more difficult for us to attract and retain personnel and could require us to enhance our wage and benefits packages. there can be no assurance that labor costs will not increase. any increase in our operating costs could cause our business to suffer. 17 table of contents severe weather could have a material adverse impact on our business. our business could be materially and adversely affected by severe weather. repercussions of severe weather conditions may include curtailment of services weather related damage to facilities and equipment resulting in suspension of operations inability to deliver materials to job sites in accordance with contract schedules and loss of productivity. in addition, oil and natural gas operations of our customers located offshore and onshore in the gulf of mexico and in mexico may be adversely affected by hurricanes and tropical storms, resulting in reduced demand for our services. further, our customers operations in the mid continent and rocky mountain regions of the united states are also adversely affected by seasonal weather conditions. this limits our access to these job sites and our ability to service wells in these areas. these constraints decrease drilling activity and the resulting shortages or high costs could delay our operations and materially increase our operating and capital costs. our business may be affected by terrorist activity and by security measures taken in response to terrorism. we may experience loss of business or delays or defaults in payments from payers that have been affected by actual or potential terrorist activities. some oil and natural gas drilling companies have implemented security measures in response to potential terrorist activities, including access restrictions, that could adversely affect our ability to market our services to new and existing customers and could increase our costs. terrorist activities and potential terrorist activities and any resulting economic downturn could adversely impact our results of operations, impair our ability to raise capital or otherwise adversely affect our ability to grow our business. we are subject to government regulations. we are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations relating to the energy industry in general and the environment in particular. environmental laws have in recent years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible parties. although we are not aware of any proposed material changes in any federal, state, local or foreign statutes, rules or regulations, any changes could materially affect our financial condition and results of operations. risks associated with dls business and industry a material or extended decline in expenditures by oil and gas companies due to a decline or volatility in oil and gas prices, a decrease in demand for oil and gas or other factors may reduce demand for dls services and substantially reduce dls revenues, profitability, cash flows and or liquidity. the profitability of dls operations depends upon conditions in the oil and natural gas industry and, specifically, the level of exploration and production expenditures of oil and gas company customers. the oil and natural gas industry is cyclical and subject to governmental price controls. the demand for contract drilling and related services is directly influenced by many factors beyond dls control, including oil and gas prices and expectations about future prices the demand for oil and gas, both in latin america and globally the cost of producing and delivering oil and natural gas advances in exploration, development and production technology government regulations, including governmental imposed commodity price controls, export controls and renationalization of a country s oil and natural gas industry 18 table of contents local and international political and economic conditions the ability of opec to set and maintain production levels and prices the level of production by non opec countries and the policies of various governments regarding exploration and development of their oil and gas reserves. depending on the factors outlined above, companies exploring for oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their drilling programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling services. such a reduction in demand may erode daily rates and utilization of dls rigs. any significant decrease in daily rates or utilization of dls rigs could materially reduce dls revenues, profitability, cash flows and or liquidity. a majority of dls revenues are derived from one customer. the termination of the contract with this customer could have a significant negative effect on the revenues, results of operations and financial condition of dls. a majority of dls revenues are currently received pursuant to a strategic agreement with pan american energy. pan american energy is a joint venture that is owned 60 by british petroleum and 40 by bridas corporation, an affiliate of the former dls stockholders from which we acquired dls, and which we refer to collectively as the dls sellers. this agreement terminates on june 30, 2008. however, pan american energy may terminate the agreement i without cause at any time with 60 days notice, or ii in the event of a breach of the agreement by dls if such breach is not cured within 20 days of notice of the breach. dls is currently in negotiations to extend this agreement to december 2010. because a majority of dls revenues are currently generated under this agreement, dls revenues and earnings will be materially adversely affected if this agreement is terminated unless dls is able to enter into a satisfactory substitute arrangement. we cannot assure you that in the event of such a termination dls would be able to enter into a substitute arrangement on terms similar to those contained in the current agreement with pan american energy. dls operations and financial condition could be affected by union activity and general labor unrest. additionally, dls labor expenses could increase as a result of governmental regulation of payments to employees. in argentina, labor organizations have substantial support and have considerable political influence. the demands of labor organizations have increased in recent years as a result of the general labor unrest and dissatisfaction resulting from the disparity between the cost of living and salaries in argentina as a result of the devaluation of the argentine peso. there can be no assurance that dls will not face labor disruptions in the future or that any such disruptions will not have a material adverse effect on dls financial condition or results of operations. the argentine government has in the past and may in the future promulgate laws, regulations and decrees requiring companies in the private sector to maintain minimum wage levels and provide specified benefits to employees, including significant mandatory severance payments. in the aftermath of the argentine economic crisis of 2001 and 2002, both the government and private sector companies have experienced significant pressure from employees and labor organizations relating to wage levels and employee benefits. in early 2005, the argentine government promised not to order salary increases by decree. however, there has been no abatement of pressure to mandate salary increases, and it is possible the government will adopt measures that will increase salaries or require dls to provide additional benefits, which would increase dls costs and potentially reduce dls profitability, cash flow and or liquidity. rig upgrade, refurbishment and construction projects are subject to risks, including delays and cost overruns, which could have an adverse effect on dls results of operations and cash flows. dls often has to make upgrade and refurbishment expenditures for its rig fleet to comply with dls quality management and preventive maintenance system or contractual requirements or when repairs are required in response to an inspection by a governmental authority. dls may also make significant expenditures when it moves rigs from one location to another. additionally, dls may make substantial 19 table of contents expenditures for the construction of new rigs. rig upgrade, refurbishment and construction projects are subject to the risks of delay or cost overruns inherent in any large construction project, including the following shortages of material or skilled labor unforeseen engineering problems unanticipated change orders work stoppages adverse weather conditions long lead times for manufactured rig components unanticipated cost increases and inability to obtain the required permits or approvals. significant cost overruns or delays could adversely affect dls financial condition and results of operations. additionally, capital expenditures for rig upgrade, refurbishment or construction projects could exceed dls planned capital expenditures, impairing dls ability to service its debt obligations. an oversupply of comparable rigs in the geographic markets in which dls competes could depress the utilization rates and dayrates for dls rigs and materially reduce dls revenues and profitability. utilization rates, which are the number of days a rig actually works divided by the number of days the rig is available for work, and dayrates, which are the contract prices customers pay for rigs per day, are also affected by the total supply of comparable rigs available for service in the geographic markets in which dls competes. improvements in demand in a geographic market may cause dls competitors to respond by moving competing rigs into the market, thus intensifying price competition. significant new rig construction could also intensify price competition. in the past, there have been prolonged periods of rig oversupply with correspondingly depressed utilization rates and dayrates largely due to earlier, speculative construction of new rigs. improvements in dayrates and expectations of longer term, sustained improvements in utilization rates and dayrates for drilling rigs may lead to construction of new rigs. these increases in the supply of rigs could depress the utilization rates and dayrates for dls rigs and materially reduce dls revenues and profitability. worldwide political and economic developments may hurt dls operations materially. currently, dls derives substantially all of its revenues from operations in argentina and a small portion from operations in bolivia. dls operations are subject to the following risks, among others expropriation of assets nationalization of components of the energy industry in the geographic areas where dls operates foreign currency fluctuations and devaluation new economic and tax policies restrictions on currency, income, capital or asset repatriation political instability, war and civil disturbances uncertainty or instability resulting from armed hostilities or other crises in the middle east or the geographic areas in which dls operates and acts of terrorism. dls attempts to limit the risks of currency fluctuation and restrictions on currency repatriation where possible by obtaining contracts providing for payment of a percentage of the contract in u.s. dollars or freely convertible foreign currency. to the extent possible, dls seeks to limit its exposure to local currencies by matching the acceptance of local currencies to dls expense requirements in those currencies. although dls has done this in the past, dls may not be able to take these actions in the future, thereby exposing dls to foreign currency fluctuations that could cause its results of operations, financial condition and cash flows to deteriorate materially. 20 table of contents over the past several years, argentina and bolivia have experienced political and economic instability that resulted in significant changes in their general economic policies and regulations. dls derives a small portion of its revenues from operating one drilling rig in bolivia. recently, bolivian president evo morales announced the nationalization of bolivia s natural gas industry and ordered the bolivian military to occupy bolivia s natural gas fields. this measure will likely adversely affect the bolivian operations of foreign oil and natural gas companies operating in bolivia, including dls customers and potential future customers, and accordingly, dls prospects for future business in bolivia may be harmed. in addition, in light of these recent political developments in bolivia, dls assets in bolivia may be subject to an increased risk of expropriation or government imposed restrictions on movement to a new location. in light of the early stage and uncertainty of political developments affecting the energy industry in bolivia, we are unable to predict the effect that recent events may have on dls operations, financial results or business plans. there is a risk that the changes resulting from the recent events in bolivia will adversely affect dls financial position or results of operations, and dls operations may be further adversely affected by continuing economic and political instability in bolivia. furthermore, if nationalistic measures similar to those developing in bolivia were to be adopted in other countries where dls may in the future seek drilling contracts, dls prospects in such countries may be adversely affected. dls operations are also subject to other risks, including foreign monetary and tax policies, expropriation, nationalization and nullification or modification of contracts. additionally, dls ability to compete may be limited by foreign governmental regulations that favor or require the awarding of contracts to local contractors or by regulations requiring foreign contractors to employ citizens of, or purchase supplies from, a particular jurisdiction. furthermore, dls may face governmentally imposed restrictions from time to time on its ability to transfer funds. devaluation of the argentine peso will adversely affect dls results of operations. the argentine peso has been subject to significant devaluation in the past and may be subject to significant fluctuations in the future. given the economic and political uncertainties in argentina, it is impossible to predict whether, and to what extent, the value of the argentine peso may depreciate or appreciate against the u.s. dollar. we cannot predict how these uncertainties will affect dls financial results, but there is a risk that dls financial performance could be adversely affected. moreover, we cannot predict whether the argentine government will further modify its monetary policy and, if so, what effect any of these changes could have on the value of the argentine peso. such changes could have an adverse effect on dls financial condition and results of operations. argentina continues to face considerable political and economic uncertainty. although general economic conditions have shown improvement and political protests and social disturbances have diminished considerably since the economic crisis of 2001 and 2002, the rapid and radical nature of the changes in the argentine social, political, economic and legal environment over the past several years and the absence of a clear political consensus in favor of any particular set of economic policies have given rise to significant uncertainties about the country s economic and political future. it is currently unclear whether the economic and political instability experienced over the past several years will continue and it is possible that, despite recent economic growth, argentina may return to a deeper recession, higher inflation and unemployment and greater social unrest. if instability persists, there could be a material adverse effect on dls results of operations and financial condition. in the event of further social or political crisis, companies in argentina may also face the risk of further civil and social unrest, strikes, expropriation, nationalization, forced renegotiation or modification of existing contracts and changes in taxation policies, including royalty and tax increases and retroactive tax claims. in addition, investments in argentine companies may be further affected by changes in laws and policies of the united states affecting foreign trade, taxation and investment. 21 table of contents an increase in inflation could have a material adverse effect on dls results of operations. the devaluation of the argentine peso created pressures on the domestic price system that generated high rates of inflation in 2002 before substantially stabilizing in 2003 and remaining stable in 2004. in 2005, however, inflation rates began to increase. in addition, in response to the economic crisis in 2002, the federal government granted the central bank greater control over monetary policy than was available to it under the previous monetary regime, known as the convertibility regime, including the ability to print currency, to make advances to the federal government to cover its anticipated budget deficit and to provide financial assistance to financial institutions with liquidity problems. we cannot assure you that inflation rates will remain stable in the future. significant inflation could have a material adverse effect on dls results of operations and financial condition. dls customers may seek to cancel or renegotiate some of dls drilling contracts during periods of depressed market conditions or if dls experiences operational difficulties. substantially all of dls contracts with major customers are dayrate contracts, where dls charges a fixed charge per day regardless of the number of days needed to drill the well. during depressed market conditions, a customer may no longer need a rig that is currently under contract or may be able to obtain a comparable rig at a lower daily rate. as a result, customers may seek to renegotiate the terms of their existing drilling contracts or avoid their obligations under those contracts. in addition, dls customers may have the right to terminate existing contracts if dls experiences operational problems. the likelihood that a customer may seek to terminate a contract for operational difficulties is increased during periods of market weakness. the cancellation of a number of dls drilling contracts could materially reduce dls revenues and profitability. dls is subject to numerous governmental laws and regulations, including those that may impose significant liability on dls for environmental and natural resource damages. many aspects of dls operations are subject to laws and regulations that may relate directly or indirectly to the contract drilling and well servicing industries, including those requiring dls to control the discharge of oil and other contaminants into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. the countries where dls operates have environmental laws and regulations covering the discharge of oil and other contaminants and protection of the environment in connection with operations. failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil and even criminal penalties, the imposition of remedial obligations, and the issuance of injunctions that may limit or prohibit dls operations. laws and regulations protecting the environment have become more stringent in recent years and may in certain circumstances impose strict liability, rendering dls liable for environmental and natural resource damages without regard to negligence or fault on dls part. these laws and regulations may expose dls to liability for the conduct of, or conditions caused by, others or for acts that were in compliance with all applicable laws at the time the acts were performed. the application of these requirements, the modification of existing laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or regulations curtailing exploratory or development drilling for oil and gas could materially limit future contract drilling opportunities or materially increase dls costs or both. dls is subject to hazards customary for drilling operations, which could adversely affect its financial performance if dls is not adequately indemnified or insured. substantially all of dls operations are subject to hazards that are customary for oil and gas drilling operations, including blowouts, reservoir damage, loss of well control, cratering, oil and gas well fires and explosions, natural disasters, pollution and mechanical failure. any of these risks could result in damage to or destruction of drilling equipment, personal injury and property damage, suspension of operations or environmental damage. generally, drilling contracts provide for the division of responsibilities between a drilling company and its customer, and dls generally obtains indemnification from its customers by contract for some of these risks. however, there may be limitations on the enforceability of indemnification provisions that allow a contractor to be indemnified for damages resulting from the contractor s fault. to the extent that dls is unable to transfer such risks to customers by contract or indemnification agreements, dls generally seeks protection through insurance. however, dls has a significant amount of self insured retention or deductible 22 table of contents for certain losses relating to workers compensation, employers liability, general liability and property damage. there is no assurance that such insurance or indemnification agreements will adequately protect dls against liability from all of the consequences of the hazards and risks described above. the occurrence of an event not fully insured or for which dls is not indemnified against, or the failure of a customer or insurer to meet its indemnification or insurance obligations, could result in substantial losses. in addition, there can be no assurance that insurance will continue to be available to cover any or all of these risks, or, even if available, that insurance premiums or other costs will not rise significantly in the future, so as to make the cost of such insurance prohibitive. risks associated with an investment in our common stock in connection with our recent acquisitions of dls and substantially all the assets of ogr, the dls sellers have the right to designate two nominees for election to our board of directors and ogr has the right to designate one nominee for election to our board of directors. the interests of the dls sellers and ogr may be different from yours. the dls sellers collectively hold 2.5 million shares of our common stock, representing approximately 7.3 of our issued and outstanding shares as of march 1, 2007. under the investors rights agreement that we entered into in connection with the dls acquisition, the dls sellers have the right to designate two nominees for election to our board of directors. ogr holds 3.2 million shares of our common stock, representing approximately 9.3 of our issued and outstanding shares as of march 1, 2007. under the investor rights agreement that we entered into in connection with the ogr acquisition, ogr has the right to designate one nominee for election to our board of directors. as a result, the dls sellers and ogr have a greater ability to determine the composition of our board of directors and to control our future operations and strategy as compared to the voting power and control that could be exercised by a stockholder owning the same number of shares and not benefiting from board designation rights. conflicts of interest between the dls sellers and ogr, on the one hand, and other holders of our securities, on the other hand, may arise with respect to sales of shares of capital stock owned by the dls sellers or ogr or other matters. in addition, the interests of the dls sellers or ogr regarding any proposed merger or sale may differ from the interests of other holders of our securities. the board designation rights described above could also have the effect of delaying or preventing a change in our control or otherwise discouraging a potential acquirer from attempting to obtain control of us, which in turn could have a material and adverse effect on the market price of our securities and or our ability to meet our obligations thereunder. we may have a contingent liability arising out of a possible violation of section 5 of the securities act in connection with electronic communications sent to potential investors in our common stock. on or about july 20, 2006, one of the proposed underwriters of our common stock offering, which closed on august 14, 2006, sent e mails and or instant messages to approximately 20 potential investors in our common stock. although we did not authorize these communications, and we believe they were not made or intended to be made on our behalf, these communications may have constituted violations of section 5 of the securities act. accordingly, if the recipients of these emails purchased shares in the august 2006 common stock offering, they might have the right, under certain circumstances, to require us to repurchase those shares. consequently, we could have a contingent liability arising out of these possible violations of the securities act. the magnitude of this liability is presently impossible to quantify, and would depend upon the number of shares purchased by the recipients of such communications and the trading price of our common stock. however, the proposed underwriter who sent these electronic communications did not act as an underwriter in the august 2006 common stock offering, and we and the underwriters that did participate in the august 2006 common stock offering took measures designed to ensure that the recipients of the communications did not have the opportunity to purchase shares in that offering. furthermore, if any investors in our common stock do assert any such liability, we intend to contest the matter vigorously, and in light of the remedial measures and our belief that the communications were not made or intended to be made on our behalf, we do not believe that any such liability would be material to our financial condition. 23 table of contents our stock price may decrease in response to various factors, which could adversely affect our business and cause our stockholders to suffer significant losses. these factors include decreases in prices for oil and natural gas resulting in decreased demand for our services variations in our operating results and failure to meet expectations of investors and analysts increases in interest rates the loss of customers failure of customers to pay for our services competition illiquidity of the market for our common stock developments specifically affecting the argentine economy sales of common stock by existing stockholders and other developments affecting us or the financial markets. a reduced stock price will result in a loss to investors and will adversely affect our ability to issue stock to fund our activities. existing stockholders interest in us may be diluted by additional issuances of equity securities. we expect to issue additional equity securities to fund the acquisition of additional businesses and pursuant to employee benefit plans. we may also issue additional equity for other purposes. these securities may have the same rights as our common stock or, alternatively, may have dividend, liquidation, or other preferences to our common stock. the issuance of additional equity securities will dilute the holdings of existing stockholders and may reduce the share price of our common stock. we do not expect to pay dividends on our common stock, and investors will be able to receive cash in respect of the shares of common stock only upon the sale of the shares. we have not paid any cash dividends on our common stock within the last ten years, and we have no intention in the foreseeable future to pay any cash dividends on our common stock. furthermore, our credit agreement, the indenture governing our outstanding senior notes restrict our ability to pay dividends on our common stock. therefore, an investor in our common stock will obtain an economic benefit from the common stock only after an increase in its trading price and only by selling the common stock. substantial sales of our common stock could adversely affect our stock price. sales of a substantial number of shares of common stock, or the perception that such sales could occur, could adversely affect the market price of our common stock by introducing a large number of sellers to the market. such sales could cause the market price of our common stock to decline. we have 34,251,443 shares outstanding as of march 1, 2007. at december 31, 2006, we had reserved an additional 3,099,365 shares of common stock for issuance under our equity compensation plans, of which 1,346,365 shares were issuable upon the exercise of outstanding options with a weighted average exercise price of 7.02 per share. in addition, we have reserved 4,000 shares of common stock for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding options with an exercise price of 13.75 per share granted to former and continuing board members in 1999 and 2000. at december 31, 2006, we also have reserved 4,000 shares of common stock for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding warrants with an exercise price of 4.65 per share . in connection with our acquisition of dls, we entered into an investors rights agreement with the seller parties to the dls stock purchase agreement, who collectively hold 2.5 million shares of our common stock. in connection with our acquisition of substantially all the assets of ogr, we entered into an investor rights agreement with ogr, who holds 3.2 million shares of our common stock. under these agreements, the dls sellers and ogr are entitled to certain rights with respect to the registration of the sale of such shares under the securities act. by exercising their registration rights and causing a large number of shares to be sold in the public market, these holders could cause the market price of our common stock to decline. 24 table of contents we cannot predict whether future sales of our common stock, or the availability of our common stock for sale, will adversely affect the market price for our common stock or our ability to raise capital by offering equity securities. risks associated with our indebtedness we have a substantial amount of debt, which could adversely affect our financial health and prevent us from making principal and interest payments on our outstanding senior notes and our other debt. at december 31, 2006, after giving effect to the sale of the senior notes and the issuance of our common stock in january 2007 and the application of the proceeds therefrom, as if such transaction had occurred on that date, we had approximately 518.4 million of consolidated total indebtedness outstanding and approximately 15.3 million of additional secured borrowing capacity available under our credit agreement. our substantial debt could make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to our outstanding senior notes, any other debt securities we may offer and our other debt increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions, including declines in oil and natural gas prices and declines in drilling activities limit our ability to obtain additional financing for future working capital, capital expenditures, mergers and other general corporate purposes require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to payments on our debt, thereby reducing the availability of our cash flow for operations and other purposes limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry in which we operate make us more vulnerable to increases in interest rates place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors that have less debt and have a material adverse effect on us if we fail to comply with the covenants in the indentures relating to our outstanding senior notes, and any other debt securities we may offer or in the instruments governing our other debt. in addition, we may incur substantial additional debt in the future. each of the indentures governing our outstanding senior notes permits and we anticipate that the indentures governing any other debt securities we may offer will also permit us to incur additional debt, and our credit agreement permits additional borrowings. if new debt is added to our current debt levels, these related risks could increase. we may not maintain sufficient revenues to sustain profitability or to meet our capital expenditure requirements and our financial obligations. also, we may not be able to generate a sufficient amount of cash flow to meet our debt service obligations. our ability to make scheduled payments or to refinance our obligations with respect to our debt will depend on our financial and operating performance, which, in turn, is subject to prevailing economic conditions and to certain financial, business, and other factors beyond our control. if our cash flow and capital resources are insufficient to fund our debt service obligations, we may be forced to reduce or delay scheduled expansion and capital expenditures, sell material assets or operations, obtain additional capital or restructure our debt. we cannot assure you that our operating performance, cash flow and capital resources will be sufficient for payment of our debt in the future. in the event that we are required to dispose of material assets or operations or restructure our debt to meet our debt service and other obligations, we cannot assure you that the terms of any such transaction would be satisfactory to us or if or how soon any such transaction could be completed. 25 table of contents if we fail to obtain additional financing, we may be unable to refinance our existing debt, expand our current operations or acquire new businesses, which could result in a failure to grow or result in defaults in our obligations under our credit agreement, our outstanding senior notes or our other debt securities. in order to refinance indebtedness, expand existing operations and acquire additional businesses, we will require substantial amounts of capital. there can be no assurance that financing, whether from equity or debt financings or other sources, will be available or, if available, will be on terms satisfactory to us. if we are unable to obtain such financing, we will be unable to acquire additional businesses and may be unable to meet our obligations under our credit agreement, our senior notes or any other debt securities we may offer. the indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and our credit agreement impose and we anticipate that the indentures governing any other debt securities we may offer will also impose restrictions on us that may limit the discretion of management in operating our business and that, in turn, could impair our ability to meet our obligations. the indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and our credit agreement contain and we anticipate that the indentures governing any other debt securities we may offer will also contain various restrictive covenants that limit management s discretion in operating our business. in particular, these covenants limit our ability to, among other things incur additional debt make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on our capital stock or purchase or redeem or retire capital stock sell assets, including capital stock of our restricted subsidiaries restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries create liens enter into transactions with affiliates and merge or consolidate with another company. the credit agreement also requires us to maintain specified financial ratios and satisfy certain financial tests. our ability to maintain or meet such financial ratios and tests may be affected by events beyond our control, including changes in general economic and business conditions, and we cannot assure you that we will maintain or meet such ratios and tests or that the lenders under the credit agreement will waive any failure to meet such ratios or tests. these covenants could materially and adversely affect our ability to finance our future operations or capital needs. furthermore, they may restrict our ability to expand, to pursue our business strategies and otherwise to conduct our business. our ability to comply with these covenants may be affected by circumstances and events beyond our control, such as prevailing economic conditions and changes in regulations, and we cannot assure you that we will be able to comply with them. a breach of these covenants could result in a default under the indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and any other debt securities we may offer and or the credit agreement. if there were an event of default under any of the indentures and or the credit agreement, the affected creditors could cause all amounts borrowed under these instruments to be due and payable immediately. additionally, if we fail to repay indebtedness under our credit agreement when it becomes due, the lenders under the credit agreement could proceed against the assets which we have pledged to them as security. our assets and cash flow might not be sufficient to repay our outstanding debt in the event of a default. 