-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 Qn/gvtrI1/y0HuYk1JobJj+xSmdBG+BczNQ8W0jtwGeI01SGDl7y9Pa4rEqMYtTQ
 0NqYvFYc/klrUguCXsIbVA==

0000950129-06-002926.txt : 20060322
0000950129-06-002926.hdr.sgml : 20060322
20060322154441
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0000950129-06-002926
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		6
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20051231
FILED AS OF DATE:		20060322
DATE AS OF CHANGE:		20060322

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			Allis Chalmers Energy Inc.
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000003982
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	MISC INDUSTRIAL & COMMERCIAL MACHINERY & EQUIPMENT [3590]
		IRS NUMBER:				390126090
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			DE
		FISCAL YEAR END:			1231

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-02199
		FILM NUMBER:		06703737

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056
		BUSINESS PHONE:		713-369-0550

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS CORP
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19920703

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS MANUFACTURING CO
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19710614


10-K
1
h34263e10vk.htm
ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY, INC. - 12/31/2005



e10vk



Table of Contents



 

UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND
    EXCHANGE COMMISSION


Washington, D. C.
    20549

 

Form 10-K

 



  
  
  



(Mark One)
    


 


 



 





þ



 


ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d)
    OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934




 


 


FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED
    DECEMBER 31, 2005





OR






o



 


TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d)
    OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934




 


 


FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD
    FROM          
    TO






 

Commission file number 1-2199

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY
    INC.


(Exact name of registrant as
    specified in its charter)

 



  
  
  



Delaware


 


39-0126090




(State or other jurisdiction
    of


 


(I.R.S. Employer





incorporation or
    organization)



 


Identification No.)




 


 


 





5075 WESTHEIMER, SUITE 890,
    HOUSTON, TEXAS



 


77056
(Zip code)





(Address of principal executive
    offices) 



 


 





 

(713)
    369-0550


Registrant’s telephone
    number, including area code

 

SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE
    ACT:

 



  
  
  




Title of Security:



 



Name of Exchange:





 


 


 




Common Stock, par value
    $0.01 per share
    


 


American Stock Exchange
    





 

SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(g) OF THE
    ACT:


NONE

 

    Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
    seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities
    Act.  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
    reports pursuant to Section 13 or
    15(d).  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed
    all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of
    the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding
    12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
    was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
    subject to such filing requirements for the past
    90 days.  Yes þ     No o
    

 

    Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
    pursuant to ITEM 405 of
    Regulation S-K
    is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
    of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
    information statements incorporated by reference in
    Part III of this
    Form 10-K
    or any amendment to this
    Form 10-K. þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
    accelerated filer, an accelerated filer or a non-accelerated
    filer. See definition of “accelerated filer” and
    “large accelerated filer” in
    Rule 12b-2
    of the Exchange Act (Check one):

 

    Large accelerated
    filer o     Accelerated
    filer o     Non-accelerated
    filer þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
    (as defined in
    Rule 12b-2
    of the Exchange
    Act).  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    The aggregate market value of the common equity held by
    non-affiliates of the registrant, computed using the average of
    the closing price of the common stock of $5.65 per share on
    June 30, 2005, as reported on the American Stock Exchange,
    was approximately $46,064,970 (affiliates included for this
    computation only: directors, executive officers and holders of
    more than 5% of the registrant’s common stock).

 

    At March 14, 2006 there were 17,223,142 shares of
    common stock outstanding.

 

DOCUMENTS
    INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:

 

    Portions of the Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. Proxy Statement
    prepared for the 2006 annual meeting of shareholders, pursuant
    to Regulation 14A, are incorporated by reference into
    Part III of this Report.

 






 







 

2005
    FORM 10-K
    CONTENTS 

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




Item



 


 


 


Page



 





PART I








1.






 


Business



 




5
    









2.






 


Properties



 




15
    









3.






 


Legal
    Proceedings



 




15
    






 





PART II








5.






 


Market for
    Registrant’s Common Equity and Related Stockholder
    Matters



 




17
    









6.






 


Selected Financial
    Data



 




19
    









7.






 


Management’s
    Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
    Operations



 




20
    









7A.






 


Quantitative and
    Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk



 




44
    









8.






 


Financial
    Statements



 




45
    









9.






 


Changes in and
    Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial
    Disclosure



 




86
    









9A.






 


Controls and
    Procedures



 




86
    






 





PART III








10.






 


Directors and
    Executive Officers of the Registrant



 




87
    









11.






 


Executive
    Compensation



 




87
    









12.






 


Security Ownership
    of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management



 




87
    









13.






 


Certain
    Relationships and Related Transactions



 




88
    









14.






 


Principal
    Accountant Fees and Services



 




88
    






 





PART IV








15.






 


Exhibits and
    Financial Statement Schedules



 




88
    









16.






 


Signatures and
    Certifications



 




89
    




 Stock Purchase Agreement
 Subsidiaries of Registrant
 Certification of CEO pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of CFO pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of CEO and CFO pursuant to Section 906








    2



Table of Contents


DEFINITIONS

 








    “blow out preventors” 


    Large safety device placed on the surface of an oil or natural
    gas well to maintain high pressure well bores.

 


    “booster” 


    A machine that increases the volume of air when used in
    conjunction with a compressor or a group of compressors.

 


    “capillary tubing” 


    Small diameter tubing installed in producing wells and through
    which chemicals are injected to enhance production and reduce
    corrosion and other problems.

 


    “casing” 


    A pipe placed in a drilled well to secure the well bore and
    formation.

 


    “choke manifolds” 


    An arrangement of pipes, valves and special valves on the rig
    floor that controls pressure during drilling by diverting
    pressure away from the blow-out preventors and the annulus of
    the well.

 


    “coiled tubing” 


    Small diameter tubing used to service producing and problematic
    wells and to work in high pressure applications during drilling,
    production and workover operations.

 


    “directional drilling” 


    The technique of drilling a well while varying the angle of
    direction of a well and changing the direction of a well to hit
    a specific target.

 


    “double studded adapter” 


    A flange that adapts a valve or blow-out preventor to another
    non-compatible valve.

 


    “downhole drilling” 


    The technique of directional drilling used to deviate a well
    away from surface locations to reach a specified target.

 


    “drill pipe” 


    A pipe that attaches to the drill bit to drill a well.

 


    “heavy weight spiral drill pipe” 


    Heavy drill pipe used for special applications primarily in
    directional drilling. The “spiral” design increases
    flexibility and penetration of the pipe.

 


    “horizontal drilling” 


    The technique of drilling wells at a
    90-degree
    angle.

 


    “laydown machines” 


    A truck mounted machine used to move pipe and casing and tubing
    onto a pipe rack (from which a derrick crane lifts the drill
    pipe, casing and tubing and inserts it into the well).

 


    “links” 


    Adaptors that fit on the blocks to attach handling tools.

 


    “logging-while-drilling” or “LWD” 


    The technique of measuring, in real time, the formation pressure
    and the position of equipment inside of a well.

 


    “measurement-while-drilling” or “MWD” 


    The technique used to measure direction and angle while drilling
    a well.

 


    “mist pump” 


    A drilling pump that uses mist as the circulation medium for
    injecting small amounts of foaming agent, corrosion agent and
    other chemical solutions into the well.




    3



Table of Contents









    “spacer spools” or “adapter spools” 


    High pressure connections or links which are stacked to elevate
    the blow out preventors to the drilling rig floor.

 


    “straight hole drilling” 


    The technique of drilling that allows very little or no vertical
    deviation.

 


    “test plugs” 


    A device used to test the connections of well heads and the blow
    out preventors.

 


    “torque turn service” or “torque turn
    equipment” 


    Monitoring device to insure proper makeup of the casing.

 


    “tubing” 


    A pipe placed inside the casing to allow the well to produce.

 


    “tubing work strings” 


    Tubing used on workover rigs through which high pressure
    liquids, gases or mixtures are pumped into a well to perform
    production operations.

 


    “under balanced drilling” or “air drilling” 


    A technique in which oil, natural gas, or geothermal wells are
    drilled by creating a pressure within the well that is lower
    than the reservoir pressure. The result is increased rate of
    penetration, reduced formation damage, and reduced drilling
    costs.

 


    “wear bushings” 


    A device placed inside a wellhead to protect the wellhead from
    wear.




    4



Table of Contents


 

PART I.


 

This document contains forward-looking statements that
    involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ
    materially from the results discussed in such forward-looking
    statements. Factors that might cause such differences include,
    but are not limited to, the general condition of the oil and
    natural gas drilling industry, demand for our oil and natural
    gas service and rental products, and competition. Other factors
    are identified in our Securities and Exchange Commission filings
    and elsewhere in this
    Form 10-K
    under the heading “Risk Factors” located at the end of
    “Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
    Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”


 







ITEM 1.  


BUSINESS




 

    We provide services and equipment to oil and natural gas
    exploration and production companies, domestically in Texas,
    Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah,
    Wyoming, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico, and internationally in
    Mexico. We operate in five sectors of the oil and natural gas
    service industry: directional drilling services; compressed air
    drilling services; casing and tubing services; rental tools; and
    production services. Providing high-quality, technologically
    advanced services and equipment is central to our operating
    strategy. As a result of our commitment to customer service, we
    have developed strong relationships with many of the leading oil
    and natural gas companies, including both independents and
    majors.

 

    Our growth strategy is focused on identifying and pursuing
    opportunities in markets we believe are growing faster than the
    overall oilfield services industry in which we believe we can
    capitalize on our competitive strengths. Over the past several
    years, we have significantly expanded the geographic scope of
    our operations and the range of services we provide through
    internal growth and strategic acquisitions. Our organic growth
    has primarily been achieved through expanding our geographic
    scope, acquiring complementary equipment, hiring personnel to
    service new regions and cross-selling our products and services
    from existing operating locations. Since 2001, we have completed
    14 acquisitions, including six in 2005 and one in 2006. Our 2006
    acquisition of Specialty Rental Tools Inc., or Specialty, not
    only balances our revenue mix generated between rental tools and
    service operations and between onshore and offshore operations,
    but enhances the scope, capacity and customer base in our rental
    tools business.

 

    As used herein, “Allis-Chalmers”, “we”,
    “our” and “us” may refer to Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc. or its subsidiaries. The use of these terms is not
    intended to connote any particular corporate status or
    relationships.

 

    Our annual reports on
    form 10-K,
    quarterly reports on
    Form 10-Q,
    current reports on
    Form 8-K
    and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
    Section 13 (a) or 15 (d) of the Securities
    Exchange Act of 1934, are made available free of charge on our
    website at www.alchenergy.com.

 

    We have adopted a Business Code of Ethics to provide guidance to
    our directors, officers and employees on matters of business
    conduct and ethics. Our Business Code of Ethics is available on
    the investor relations section of our website.

 

    Information contained on or connected to our website is not
    incorporated by reference into this annual report on
    Form 10-K
    and should not be considered part of this report or any other
    filing we make with the SEC.

 

Our
    History

 







 
    • 


    We were incorporated in 1913 under Delaware law.


 

 
    • 


    We reorganized in bankruptcy in 1988 and sold all of our major
    businesses. From 1988 to May 2001 we had only one operating
    company in the equipment repair business.


 

 
    • 


    In May 2001, under new management we consummated a merger in
    which we acquired OilQuip Rentals, Inc., or OilQuip, and its
    wholly-owned subsidiary, Mountain Compressed Air, Inc.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2001, we sold Houston Dynamic Services, Inc., our
    last pre-bankruptcy business.





    5



Table of Contents

 







 
    • 


    In February 2002, we acquired approximately 81% of the capital
    stock of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services Inc., or Tubular,
    formerly known as Jens’ Oilfield Service, Inc. and
    substantially all of the capital stock of Strata Directional
    Technology, Inc., which we refer to as Strata.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2003, we entered into a limited liability company
    operating agreement with M-I L.L.C., or M-I, a joint venture
    between Smith International and Schlumberger N.V., to form a
    Delaware limited liability company named AirComp LLC, or
    AirComp. Pursuant to this agreement, we owned 55% and M-I owned
    45% of AirComp.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of the capital
    stock of Tubular.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2004, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc., which we refer to as Safco


 

 
    • 


    In November 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all of the
    assets of Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc. and Marquis Bit
    Co., LLC, which we refer to collectively as Diamond Air.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2004, we acquired Downhole Injection Services, LLC,
    or Downhole.


 

 
    • 


    In January 2005, we changed our name from Allis-Chalmers
    Corporation to Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


 

 
    • 


    In April 2005, we acquired Delta Rental Service, Inc., or Delta,
    and, in May 2005, we acquired Capcoil Tubing Services, Inc. or
    Capcoil


 

 
    • 


    In July 2005, we acquired M-I’s interest in AirComp, and
    acquired the compressed air drilling assets of
    W. T. Enterprises, Inc., which we refer to as W.T.


 

 
    • 


    Effective August 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock
    of Target Energy Inc., or Target.


 

 
    • 


    In September of 2005 we acquired the casing and tubing assets of
    IHS/Spindletop, a division of Patterson Services, Inc., a
    subsidiary of RPC, Inc.


 

 
    • 


    In January 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty.



 

    As a result of these transactions, our prior results may not be
    indicative of current or future operations of those sectors.

 

Industry
    Overview

 

    We provide products and services primarily to domestic onshore
    and offshore oil and natural gas exploration and production
    companies. The main factor influencing demand for our products
    and services is the level of drilling activity by oil and
    natural gas companies, which, in turn, depends largely on
    current and anticipated future crude oil and natural gas prices
    and production depletion rates. According to the Energy
    Information Agency of the U.S. Department of Energy, or
    EIA, from 1990 to 2005, demand for oil and natural gas in the
    United States grew at an average annual rate of 1.5%, while
    supply decreased at an average annual rate of just over 2%.
    Current industry forecasts suggest an increasing demand for oil
    and natural gas coupled with a flat or declining production
    curve, which we believe should result in the continuation of
    historically high crude oil and natural gas commodity prices.
    The EIA forecasts that U.S. oil and natural gas consumption
    will increase at an average annual rate of 1.4% and 1.3% through
    2025, respectively. Conversely, the EIA estimates that
    U.S. oil production will remain flat and natural gas
    production will increase at an average annual rate of 0.6%.

 

    We anticipate that oil and natural gas exploration and
    production companies will continue to increase capital spending
    for their exploration and drilling programs. In recent years,
    much of this expansion has focused on natural gas drilling
    activities. According to Baker Hughes rig count data, the
    average total rig count in the United States increased 67% from
    918 in 2000 to 1,533 in February 2006, while the average natural
    gas rig count increased 83% from 720 in 2000 to 1,321 in
    February 2006. While the number of rigs drilling for natural gas
    has increased by approximately 200% since the beginning of 1996,
    natural gas production has only increased by approximately 1.5%
    over the same period of time. This is largely a function of
    increasing decline rates for natural gas wells in the
    United States. We believe that a continued increase in



    6



Table of Contents


    drilling activity will be required for the natural gas industry
    to help meet the expected increased demand for natural gas in
    the United States.

 

    We believe oil and natural gas producers are becoming
    increasingly focused on their core competencies in identifying
    reserves and reducing burdensome capital and maintenance costs.
    In addition, we believe our customers are currently
    consolidating their supplier base to streamline their purchasing
    operations and benefit from economies of scale. We also believe
    that certain operational trends in the industry are favoring
    smaller, integrated oilfield services and rental tool providers,
    like us, that can provide a range of products and services,
    while more easily adapting to changing customer demands. We also
    believe that:

 







 
    • 


    producers are more heavily favoring integrated suppliers that
    can provide a broad, comprehensive offering of products and
    services in many geographic locations; in addition, many
    businesses in the highly fragmented oilfield services industry
    lack sufficient size, depth or management (many businesses are
    family-owned and managed) and sophisticated service and control
    capabilities;


 

 
    • 


    consolidation among larger oilfield services providers has
    created an opportunity for us to compete effectively in markets
    that are underserved by the large oilfield services and
    equipment companies; and


 

 
    • 


    based on technological advancements in drilling for oil and
    natural gas, producers are demanding higher quality service and
    equipment from their suppliers.



 

Competitive
    Strengths

 

    We believe the following competitive strengths will enable us to
    capitalize on future opportunities:

 

Strategic position in high growth markets.  We
    focus on markets we believe are growing faster than the overall
    oilfield services industry and in which we can capitalize on our
    competitive strengths. Pursuant to this strategy, we have become
    a leading provider of products and services in what we believe
    to be two of the fastest growing segments of the oilfield
    services industry: directional drilling and air drilling. We
    employ approximately 70 full-time directional drillers, and
    we believe our ability to attract and retain experienced
    drillers has made us a leader in the segment. We also believe we
    are one of the largest air drillers based on amount of air
    drilling equipment. In addition, we have significant operations
    in what we believe will be among the higher growth oil and
    natural gas producing regions within the United States and
    internationally, including the Barnett Shale in North Texas,
    onshore and offshore Louisiana, the Piceance Basin in Southern
    Colorado and all five oil and natural gas producing regions in
    Mexico.

 

Strong relationships with diversified customer
    base.  Our diverse customer base is characterized
    by strong relationships with many of the major and independent
    oil and natural gas producers and service companies throughout
    Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi,
    Utah, Wyoming, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico and Mexico. Our
    largest customers include Burlington Resources, BP,
    ChevronTexaco, Kerr-McGee, Dominion Resources, Remington Oil and
    Gas, Petrohawk Energy, Newfield Exploration, El Paso
    Corporation, Matyep and Anadarko Petroleum. Since 2002, we have
    broadened our customer base as a result of our acquisitions,
    technical expertise and reputation for quality customer service
    and by providing customers with technologically advanced
    equipment and highly skilled operating personnel.

 

Successful execution of growth strategy.  Over
    the past five years, we have grown both organically and through
    successful acquisitions of competing businesses. Since 2001, we
    have completed 14 acquisitions. Our approach is to improve the
    operating performance of the businesses we acquire by increasing
    their asset utilization and operating efficiency. These
    acquisitions have expanded our geographic presence or customer
    base and, in turn, have enabled us to cross-sell various
    products and services through our existing operating locations.

 

Experienced and dedicated management team.  The
    members of our executive management team have extensive
    experience in the energy sector, and consequently have developed
    strong and longstanding relationships with many of the major and
    independent exploration and production companies. We believe
    that our management team has demonstrated its ability to grow
    our businesses organically, make strategic acquisitions and
    successfully integrate these acquired businesses into our
    operations.



    7



Table of Contents


Business
    Strategy

 

    We intend to continue to pursue the growth strategy that has
    allowed us to significantly increase our revenues and
    profitability over the last several years. The key elements of
    our growth strategy include:

 

Expand products and services provided in existing operating
    locations.  Since the beginning of 2003, we have
    invested approximately $27.7 million in capital
    expenditures to grow our business organically by expanding our
    product and service offerings in existing operating locations.
    This strategy is consistent with our belief that oil and natural
    gas producers more heavily favor integrated suppliers that can
    provide a broad product and service offering in many geographic
    locations.

 

Prudently pursue strategic acquisitions.  To
    complement our organic growth, we seek to opportunistically
    complete, at attractive valuations, strategic acquisitions that
    will complement our products and services, expand our geographic
    footprint and market presence, further diversify our customer
    base and be accretive to earnings.

 

Expand geographically to provide greater access and service
    to key customer segments.  During the last twelve
    months, we have opened new locations in Texas, New Mexico,
    Colorado, Oklahoma and Louisiana in order to enhance our
    proximity to customers and more efficiently serve their needs.
    We intend to continue to establish new locations in active oil
    and natural gas producing regions in the United States in order
    to increase the utilization of our equipment and personnel. We
    also intend to expand into international markets through
    strategic acquisitions and alliances similar to our casing and
    tubing operations in Mexico.

 

Increase utilization of assets.  We seek to
    grow revenues and enhance margins by continuing to increase the
    utilization of our rental assets with new and existing
    customers. We expect to accomplish this through leveraging
    longstanding relationships with our customers and cross-selling
    our suite of services and equipment, while taking advantage of
    continued improvements in industry fundamentals. We also expect
    to implement this strategy at Specialty, thus improving the
    utilization and profitability of this newly acquired business
    with minimal additional investment.

 

Target services in which we have a competitive
    advantage.  Consolidation in the oilfield services
    industry has created an opportunity for us to compete
    effectively in markets that are underserved by the large
    oilfield services and equipment companies. In addition, we
    believe we can provide a more comprehensive range of products
    and services than many of our smaller competitors.

 

Description
    Of Businesses

 

Directional Drilling Services.  Through Strata
    and Target, we utilize
    state-of-the-art
    equipment to provide well planning and engineering services,
    directional drilling packages, downhole motor technology, well
    site directional supervision, exploratory and development
    re-entry drilling, downhole guidance services and other drilling
    services to our customers. We also provide
    logging-while-drilling, or LWD, and measurement-while-drilling,
    or MWD, services. We have a team of approximately 70 directional
    drillers and maintain a selection of approximately 150 drilling
    motors. According to Baker Hughes, as of February 2006, 40% of
    all wells in the United States are drilled directionally
    and/or
    horizontally. We expect that figure to grow over the next
    several years as companies seek to exploit maturing fields and
    sensitive formations. Management believes directional drilling
    offers several advantages over conventional drilling including:

 







 
    • 


    improvement of total cumulative recoverable reserves;


 

 
    • 


    improved reservoir production performance beyond conventional
    vertical wells; and


 

 
    • 


    reduction of the number of field development wells.



 

    Since 2002, we have increased our team of directional drillers
    from 10 to approximately 70. Our straight-hole motors offer
    opportunity to capture additional market share. We have also
    recently expanded our directional drilling services segment with
    the acquisition of all of the outstanding capital stock of
    Target.

 

Compressed Air Drilling Services.  Through
    AirComp, we provide compressed air, drilling chemicals and other
    specialized drilling products for underbalanced drilling
    applications, which we refer to as



    8



Table of Contents


    compressed air drilling services. With a combined fleet of over
    130 compressors and boosters, we believe we are one of the
    world’s largest providers of compressed air, or
    underbalanced, drilling services. We also provide premium air
    hammers and bits to oil and natural gas companies for use in
    underbalanced drilling. Our broad and diversified product line
    enables us to compete in the underbalanced drilling market with
    an equipment package engineered and customized to specifically
    meet customer requirements.

 

    Underbalanced drilling shortens the time required to drill a
    well and enhances production by minimizing formation damage.
    There is a trend in the industry to drill, complete and workover
    wells with underbalanced drilling operations and we expect the
    market to continue to grow.

 

    In July 2005, we purchased the compressed air drilling assets of
    W. T., operating in West Texas and acquired the remaining 45%
    equity interest in AirComp from M-I. The acquired assets include
    air compressors, boosters, mist pumps, rolling stock and other
    equipment. These assets were integrated into AirComp’s
    assets and complement and add to AirComp’s product and
    service offerings. We currently provide compressed air drilling
    services in Texas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and
    Wyoming. We are also in the process of expanding our services to
    Arkansas.

 

Casing and Tubing Services.  Through Tubular ,
    we provide specialized equipment and trained operators to
    perform a variety of pipe handling services, including
    installing casing and tubing, changing out drill pipe and
    retrieving production tubing for both onshore and offshore
    drilling and workover operations, which we refer to as casing
    and tubing services. All wells drilled for oil and natural gas
    require casing to be installed for drilling, and if the well is
    producing, tubing will be required in the completion phase. We
    currently provide casing and tubing services primarily in Texas,
    Louisiana and both onshore and offshore in the Gulf of Mexico
    and Mexico. We expanded our casing and tubing services in
    September 2005 by acquiring the casing and tubing assets of
    IHS/Spindletop, a division of Patterson Services, Inc., a
    subsidiary of RPC, Inc. We paid $15.7 million for RPC,
    Inc.’s casing and tubing assets, which consisted of casing
    and tubing installation equipment, including hammers, elevators,
    trucks, pickups, power units, laydown machines, casing tools and
    torque turn equipment.

 

    The acquisition of RPC, Inc.’s casing and tubing assets
    increased our capability in casing and tubing services and
    expanded our geographic capability. We opened new field offices
    in Corpus Christi, Texas, Kilgore, Texas, Lafayette, Louisiana
    and Houma, Louisiana. The acquisition allowed us to enter the
    East Texas and Louisiana market for casing and tubing services
    as well as offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. Additionally, the
    acquisition greatly expanded our premium tubing services.

 

    We provide equipment used in casing and tubing services in
    Mexico to Materiales y Equipo Petroleo, S.A. de C.V., or Matyep.
    Matyep provides equipment and services for offshore and onshore
    drilling operations to Petroleos Mexicanos, known as Pemex, in
    Villahermosa, Reynosa, Veracruz and Ciudad del Carmen, Mexico.
    Matyep provides all personnel, repairs, maintenance, insurance
    and supervision for provision of the casing and tubing crew and
    torque turn service. The term of the lease agreement pursuant to
    which we provide the equipment and Matyep provides the above
    listed items continues for as long as Matyep is successful in
    maintaining its casing and tubing business with Pemex. Services
    to offshore drilling operations in Mexico are traditionally
    seasonal, with less activity during the first quarter of each
    calendar year due to weather conditions.

 

    For the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, our
    Mexico operations accounted for approximately $6.4 million,
    $5.1 million and $3.7 million, respectively, of our
    revenues. We provide extended payment terms to Matyep and
    maintain a high accounts receivable balance due to these terms.
    The accounts receivable balance was approximately
    $2.2 million at December 31, 2005 and approximately
    $968,000 at December 31, 2004. Tubular has been providing
    services to Pemex in association with Matyep since 1997.

 

Rental Tools.  We provide specialized rental
    equipment for both onshore and offshore well drilling,
    completion and workover operations. Most wells drilled for oil
    and natural gas require some form of rental tools in the
    completion phase of a well. Our rental tools segment was
    established with the acquisition of Safco in September 2004 and
    of Delta in April 2005.



    9



Table of Contents


    We have an inventory of specialized equipment consisting of
    heavy weight spiral drill pipe, double studded adapters, test
    plugs, wear bushings, adaptor spools, baskets and spacer spools
    and other assorted handling tools in various sizes to meet our
    customers demands. We charge customers for rental equipment on a
    daily basis. The customer is liable for the cost of inspection
    and repairs or lost equipment. We currently provide rental tool
    equipment in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Mississippi, Colorado
    and offshore in the Gulf of Mexico.

 

    We significantly expanded our rental tools segment in January
    2006 with the acquisition of Specialty. Specialty has been in
    the rental tools business for over 25 years, providing oil
    and natural gas operators and oilfield services companies with
    rental equipment. Specialty rents drill pipe, heavy weight
    spiral drill pipe, tubing work strings, blow-out preventors,
    choke manifold and various valves and handling tools for oil and
    natural gas drilling. The acquisition of Specialty gives us a
    broader scope of rental tools to offer our existing customer
    base, which we believe will allow us to better compete in deep
    water drilling operations in the area of premium rental drill
    pipe and handling equipment. We also expect that the acquisition
    of Specialty will add new customer relationships and enhance our
    relationships with key existing customers. In February of 2006,
    we merged Specialty and Delta into Safco and named the new
    entity, Allis-Chalmers Rental Tools, Inc. or Rental Tools.

 

Production Services.  We supply specialized
    equipment and trained operators to install and retrieve
    capillary tubing, through which chemicals are injected into
    producing wells to increase production and reduce corrosion. In
    addition, we perform workover services with coiled tubing units.
    Chemicals are injected through the tubing to targeted zones up
    to depths of approximately 20,000 feet. The result is
    improved production from treatment of downhole corrosion, scale,
    paraffin and salt
    build-up in
    producing wells. Natural gas wells with low bottom pressures can
    experience fluid accumulation in the tubing and well bore. This
    injection system can inject a foaming agent which lightens the
    fluids allowing them to flow out of the well. Additionally,
    corrosion inhibitors can be introduced to reduce corrosion in
    the well. Our production services segment was established with
    the acquisition of Downhole, in December 2004, and the
    acquisition of Capcoil, in May 2005. In February of 2006, we
    merged Downhole into Capcoil and named the new entity
    Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc., or Production Services.

 

    We have an inventory of specialized equipment consisting of
    capillary and coil tubing units in various sizes ranging from
    1/4²
    to
    11/4²
    along with nitrogen pumping and transportation equipment. We
    have placed orders for two additional capillary units and two
    additional coil tubing units for delivery in 2006. The new coil
    tubing units range in size from
    11/4²
    to
    13/4².
    We also maintain a full range of stainless and carbon steel
    coiled tubing and related supplies used in the installation of
    the tubing. We sell or rent the tubing and charge a fee for its
    installation, servicing and removal, which includes the service
    personnel and associated equipment on a turn key hourly basis.
    We do not provide the chemicals injected into the well.

 

Cyclical
    Nature Of Equipment Rental And Services Industry

 

    The oil and natural gas equipment rental and services industry
    is highly cyclical. The most critical factor in assessing the
    outlook for the industry is the worldwide supply and demand for
    oil and the domestic supply and demand for natural gas. The
    peaks and valleys of demand are further apart than those of many
    other cyclical industries. This is primarily a result of the
    industry being driven by commodity demand and corresponding
    price increases. As demand increases, producers raise their
    prices. The price escalation enables producers to increase their
    capital expenditures. The increased capital expenditures
    ultimately result in greater revenues and profits for services
    and equipment companies. The increased capital expenditures also
    ultimately result in greater production which historically has
    resulted in increased supplies and reduced prices.

 

    Demand for our services has been strong throughout 2003, 2004
    and 2005. Management believes demand will remain strong
    throughout 2006 due to high oil and natural gas prices and the
    capital expenditure plans of the exploration and production
    companies. Because of these market fundamentals for natural gas,
    management believes the long-term trend of activity in our
    markets is favorable. However, these factors could be more than
    offset by other developments affecting the worldwide supply and
    demand for oil and natural gas products.



    10



Table of Contents


Customers

 

    In 2005, none of our customers accounted for more than 10% of
    our revenues. Our customers are the major and independent oil
    and natural gas companies operating in the United States and
    Mexico. In 2004, Matyep in Mexico represented 10.8% and
    Burlington Resources Inc. represented 10.1% of our consolidated
    revenues. In 2003, Matyep, Burlington Resources Inc. and
    El Paso Corporation represented 10.2%, 11.1% and 14.1%,
    respectively, of our revenues. The loss without replacement of
    our larger existing customers could have a material adverse
    effect on our results of operations.

 

Suppliers

 

    The equipment utilized in our business is generally available
    new from manufacturers or at auction. Currently, due to the high
    level of activity in the oilfield services industry, there is a
    high demand for new and used equipment. Consequently, there is a
    limited amount of many types of equipment available at auction
    and significant backlogs on new equipment. We own sufficient
    equipment for our projected operations over the next twelve
    months, and we believe the shortage of equipment will result in
    increased demand for our services. However, the cost of
    acquiring new equipment to expand our business could increase as
    a result of the high demand for equipment in the industry.

 

Competition

 

    We experience significant competition in all areas of our
    business. In general, the markets in which we compete are highly
    fragmented, and a large number of companies offer services that
    overlap and are competitive with our services and products. We
    believe that the principal competitive factors are technical and
    mechanical capabilities, management experience, past performance
    and price. While we have considerable experience, there are many
    other companies that have comparable skills. Many of our
    competitors are larger and have greater financial resources than
    we do.

 

    We believe that there are five major directional drilling
    companies, Schlumberger, Halliburton, Baker Hughes, W-H Energy
    Services (Pathfinder) and Weatherford, that market both
    worldwide and in the United States as well as numerous small
    regional players.

 

    Our largest competitor for compressed air drilling services is
    Weatherford. Weatherford focuses on large projects, but also
    competes in the more common compressed air, mist, foam and
    aerated mud drilling applications. Other competition comes from
    smaller regional companies.

 

    Two large companies, Frank’s Casing Crew and Rental Tools
    and Weatherford, have a substantial portion of the casing and
    tubing market in South Texas. The market remains highly
    competitive and fragmented with at least 30 casing and tubing
    crew companies working in the United States. Our primary
    competitors in Mexico are South American Enterprises and
    Weatherford, both of which provide similar products and services.

 

    There are two other significant competitors in the chemical
    injection services portion of the production services market,
    Weatherford and Dyna Coil. We believe we own approximately 30%
    of the capillary tubing units in the southwestern United States
    that are used for chemical injection services.

 

    The rental tool business is highly fragmented with hundreds of
    companies offering various rental tool services. Our largest
    competitors include Weatherford, Oil and Gas Rental Tools, Quail
    Rental Tools and Knight Rental Tools.

 

Backlog

 

    We do not view backlog of orders as a significant measure for
    our business because our jobs are short-term in nature,
    typically one to 30 days, without significant on-going
    commitments.

 

Employees

 

    Our strategy includes acquiring companies with strong management
    and entering into long-term employment contracts with key
    employees in order to preserve customer relationships and assure
    continuity following



    11



Table of Contents


    acquisition. We believe we have good relations with our
    employees, none of whom are represented by a union. We actively
    train employees across various functions, which we believe is
    crucial to motivate our workforce and maximize efficiency.
    Employees showing a higher level of skill are trained on more
    technologically complex equipment and given greater
    responsibility. All employees are responsible for on-going
    quality assurance. At March 14, 2006, we had approximately
    700 employees.

 

Executive
    Officers 

 

    Our executive officers are:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  




Name



 



Age



 



Position




 





Munawar H. Hidayatallah
    



 




61
    




 


Chairman and Chief Executive
    Officer
    





David Wilde
    



 




50
    




 


President and Chief Operating
    Officer
    





Victor M. Perez
    



 




53
    




 


Chief Financial Officer
    





Theodore F. Pound III
    



 




51
    




 


General Counsel and Secretary
    





Bruce Sauers
    



 




42
    




 


Vice President and Corporate
    Controller
    





Alya H. Hidayatallah
    



 




30
    




 


Vice
    President — Planning and Development
    





David K. Bryan
    



 




48
    




 


President and Chief Executive
    Officer of Strata
    Directional Technology, Inc.
    





Steve Collins
    



 




54
    




 


President and Chief Executive
    Officer of
    Allis-Chalmers
    Production Services, Inc.
    





James Davey
    



 




52
    




 


President and Chief Executive
    Officer of
    Allis-Chalmers
    Rental Tools Inc.
    





Gary Edwards
    



 




54
    




 


President and Chief Executive
    Officer of
    Allis-Chalmers
    Tubular Services Inc.
    





Terrence P. Keane
    



 




53
    




 


President and Chief Executive
    Officer of AirComp LLC
    





 

Munawar H. Hidayatallah has served as our Chairman of the
    Board and Chief Executive Officer since May 2001, and was
    President from May 2001 through February 2003.
    Mr. Hidayatallah was Chief Executive Officer of OilQuip
    Rentals, Inc. from its formation in February 2000 until it
    merged with us in May 2001. From December 1994 until August
    1999, Mr. Hidayatallah was the Chief Financial Officer and
    a director of IRI International, Inc., which was acquired by
    National Oilwell, Inc. in early 2000. IRI International, Inc.
    manufactured, sold and rented oilfield equipment to the oilfield
    and natural gas exploration and production sectors. From August
    1999 until February 2001, Mr. Hidayatallah worked as a
    consultant to IRI International, Inc. and Riddell Sports Inc.

 

David Wilde became our President and Chief Operating
    Officer in February 2005. Mr. Wilde was President and Chief
    Executive Officer of Strata from October 2003 through February
    2005 and served as Strata’s President and Chief Operating
    Officer from July 2003 until October 2003. From February 2002
    until July 2003, Mr. Wilde was our Executive Vice President
    of Sales and Marketing. From May 1999 until February 2002,
    Mr. Wilde served as Sales and Operations Manager at Strata.
    Mr. Wilde has more than 30 years’ experience in
    the directional drilling and rental tool sectors of the oilfield
    services industry.

 

Victor M. Perez became our Chief Financial Officer in
    August 2004. From July 2003 to July 2004, Mr. Perez was a
    private consultant engaged in corporate and international
    finance advisory. From February 1995 to June 2003,
    Mr. Perez was Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of
    Trico Marine Services, Inc., a marine transportation company
    serving the offshore energy industry. Trico Marine Services,
    Inc. filed a petition under the federal bankruptcy laws in
    December 2004. Mr. Perez was Vice President of Corporate
    Finance with Offshore Pipelines, Inc., an oilfield marine
    construction company, from October 1990 to January 1995 when
    that company merged with a subsidiary of McDermott
    International. Mr. Perez also has 15 years experience
    in international energy banking. Mr. Perez is a director of
    Safeguard Security Holdings.

 

Theodore F. Pound III became our General Counsel in
    October 2004 and was elected Secretary in January 2005. For ten
    years prior to joining us, he practiced law with the law firm of
    Wilson, Cribbs & Goren, P.C.,



    12



Table of Contents


    Houston, Texas. Mr. Pound has practiced law for more than
    25 years. Mr. Pound represented us as our lead counsel
    in each of our acquisitions beginning in 2001.

 

Bruce Sauers has served as our Vice President and
    Corporate Controller since July 2005. From January 2005 until
    July 2005, Mr. Sauers was Controller of Blast Energy Inc.,
    an oilfield services company. From June 2004 until January 2005,
    Mr. Sauers worked as a financial and accounting consultant.
    From July 2003 until June 2004, Mr. Sauers served as
    controller for HMT, Inc., an above ground storage tank company.
    From February 2003 until July 2003, Mr. Sauers served as
    assistant controller at Todco, an offshore drilling contractor.
    From August 2002 until January 2003, Mr. Sauers acted as a
    consultant on SEC accounting and financial matters. From
    December 2001 through June 2002, Mr. Sauers was corporate
    controller at OSCA, Inc., an oilfield services company, which
    merged with BJ Service Company. From December 1996 until
    December 2001, Mr. Sauers was a corporate controller at UTI
    Energy Corp., a land drilling contractor, which merged and
    became Patterson-UTI Energy, Inc. Mr. Sauers is a certified
    public accountant and has served as an accountant for
    approximately 20 years.

 

Alya H. Hidayatallah became our Vice
    President — Planning and Development in April
    2005. From January 2005 to March 2005, Ms. Hidayatallah was
    a senior financial analyst for Panda Restaurant Group. From
    November 2004 through December 2004, she worked as a financial
    analyst for Lexicon Marketing. From February 2000 until April
    2004, Ms. Hidayatallah was a Financial Analyst and Senior
    Financial Analyst in the Financial Restructuring Group of
    Houlihan Lokey Howard & Zukin. Ms. Hidayatallah
    has a degree in Business Economics from the University of
    California at Los Angeles awarded in 1997. Ms. Hidayatallah
    is Mr. Hidayatallah’s daughter.

 

David K. Bryan has served as President and Chief
    Executive Officer of Strata since February 2005. Mr. Bryan
    served as Vice President of Strata from June 2002 until February
    2005. From February 2002 to June 2002, he served as General
    Manager, and from May 1999 through February 2002, he served as
    Operations Manager of Strata. Mr. Bryan has been involved
    in the directional drilling sector since 1979.

 

Steven Collins has served as President and Chief
    Executive Officer of Production Services since December 2005.
    Mr. Collins was our corporate Vice President of Sales and
    Marketing from June 2005 to December 2005. From 2002 to 2005,
    Mr. Collins served as Sales Manager of Well Testing and
    Corporate Strategic Accounts Manager for TETRA
    Technologies. From 1997 to 2002, Mr. Collins was in sales
    for Production Well Testers. Mr. Collins has over
    25 years experience in various sales and management
    positions in the oilfield services industry.

 

James Davey has served as President and Chief Executive
    Officer of Rental Tools since April 2005. Mr. Davey was
    President of Safco Oilfield Products from September 2004 through
    2005 and served as our Executive Vice President of Business
    Development and Acquisitions in October 2003 until 2004. Prior
    to joining us, Mr. Davey had been employed with
    CooperCameron for 28 years in various positions.

 

Gary Edwards has served as President and Chief Executive
    Officer of Tubular Services since December 2005 after serving as
    Executive Vice President of Tubular Services since September
    2005. From April 1997 to September 2005, Mr. Edwards served
    as Operations Manager for International Hammer/Spindletop
    Tubular Services, a division of Patterson Services, Inc.
    Mr. Edwards has been in the casing and tubing industry for
    the past 29 years.

 

Terrence P. Keane has served as President and Chief
    Executive Officer of our AirComp, LLC subsidiary since its
    formation on July 1, 2003, and served as a consultant to
    M-I, LLC in the area of compressed air drilling from July 2002
    until June 2003. From March 1999 until June 2002, Mr. Keane
    served as Vice President and General
    Manager — Exploration, Production and Processing
    Services for Gas Technology Institute where Mr. Keane was
    responsible for all sales, marketing, operations and research
    and development of the exploration, production and processing
    business unit. For more than ten years prior to joining the Gas
    Technology Institute, Mr. Keane had various positions with
    Smith International, Inc., Houston, Texas, most recently in the
    position of Vice President Worldwide Operations and Sales for
    Smith Tool.



    13



Table of Contents


Insurance

 

    We carry a variety of insurance coverages for our operations,
    and we are partially self-insured for certain claims in amounts
    that we believe to be customary and reasonable. However, there
    is a risk that our insurance may not be sufficient to cover any
    particular loss or that insurance may not cover all losses.
    Finally, insurance rates have in the past been subject to wide
    fluctuation, and changes in coverage could result in less
    coverage, increases in cost or higher deductibles and retentions.

 

Federal
    Regulations and Environmental Matters

 

    Our operations are subject to federal, state and local laws and
    regulations relating to the energy industry in general and the
    environment in particular. Environmental laws have in recent
    years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose
    greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible
    parties. Because we provide services to companies producing oil
    and natural gas, which are toxic substances, we may become
    subject to claims relating to the release of such substances
    into the environment. While we are not currently aware of any
    situation involving an environmental claim that would likely
    have a material adverse effect on us, it is possible that an
    environmental claim could arise that could cause our business to
    suffer. We do not anticipate any material expenditures to comply
    with environmental regulations affecting our operations.

 

    In addition to claims based on our current operations, we are
    from time to time named in environmental claims relating to our
    activities prior to our reorganization in 1988 (See
    “Item 3. Legal Proceedings”).

 

Intellectual
    Property Rights

 

    Except for our relationships with our customers and suppliers
    described above, we do not own any patents, trademarks,
    licenses, franchises or concessions which we believe are
    material to the success of our business. As part of our overall
    corporate strategy to focus on our core business of providing
    services to the oil and natural gas industry and to increase
    stockholder value, we are investigating the sale or license of
    our worldwide rights to trade names and logos for products and
    services outside the energy sector.



    14



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 2.  


PROPERTIES




 

    The following table describes the location and general character
    of the principal physical properties used in each of our
    company’s businesses as of March 14, 2006. All of the
    properties are leased by us except for our property in Edinburg,
    Texas.

 



  
  
  
  
  




Business Segment



 



Location



 



Property




 





Directional Drilling Services
    



 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Corpus Christi, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Lafayette, Louisiana
    


 


Operating Location
    





Compressed Air Drilling Services
    



 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


San Angelo, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Fort Stockton, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Farmington, New Mexico
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Grand Junction, Colorado
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Wilburton, Oklahoma
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Sonora, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Grandbury, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Denver, Colorado
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Carlsbad, New Mexico
    


 


Operating Location
    





Casing and Tubing Services
    



 


Edinburg, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Pearsall, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Corpus Christi, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Kilgore, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Lafayette, Louisiana
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Houma, Louisiana
    


 


Operating Location
    





Casing and Tubing Services (cont)
    



 


Buffalo, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    





Rental Tools
    



 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Broussard, Louisiana
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Lafayette, Louisiana
    


 


Operating Location
    





Production Services
    



 


Midland, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Corpus Christi, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Kilgore, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Carthage, Texas
    


 


Operating Location
    




 


 


Cordell, Oklahoma
    


 


Operating Location
    





General Corporate
    



 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Principal Executive Offices
    





 

    The yard in Buffalo, Texas is co-owned by David Wilde, who is
    one of our executive officers.


 







ITEM 3.  


LEGAL
    PROCEEDINGS




 

    On June 29, 1987, we filed for reorganization under
    Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. Our plan
    of reorganization was confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court after
    acceptance by our creditors and stockholders, and was
    consummated on December 2, 1988.

 

    At confirmation of our plan of reorganization, the United States
    Bankruptcy Court approved the establishment of the A-C
    Reorganization Trust as the primary vehicle for distributions
    and the administration of claims under our plan of
    reorganization, two trust funds to service health care and life
    insurance programs for retired employees and a trust fund to
    process and liquidate future product liability claims. The
    trusts assumed responsibility for substantially all remaining
    cash distributions to be made to holders of claims and



    15



Table of Contents


    interests pursuant to our plan of reorganization. We were
    thereby discharged of all debts that arose before confirmation
    of our plan of reorganization.

 

    We do not administer any of the aforementioned trusts and retain
    no responsibility for the assets transferred to or distributions
    to be made by such trusts pursuant to our plan of reorganization.

 

    As part of our plan of reorganization, we settled
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency claims for cleanup
    costs at all known sites where we were alleged to have disposed
    of hazardous waste. The EPA settlement included both past and
    future cleanup costs at these sites and released us of liability
    to other potentially responsible parties in connection with
    these specific sites. In addition, we negotiated settlements of
    various environmental claims asserted by certain state
    environmental protection agencies.

 

    Subsequent to our bankruptcy reorganization, the EPA and state
    environmental protection agencies have in a few cases asserted
    we are liable for cleanup costs or fines in connection with
    several hazardous waste disposal sites containing products
    manufactured by us prior to consummation of our plan of
    reorganization. In each instance, we have taken the position
    that the cleanup costs and all other liabilities related to
    these sites were discharged in the bankruptcy, and the cases
    have been disposed of without material cost. A number of Federal
    Courts of Appeal have issued rulings consistent with this
    position, and based on such rulings, we believe that we will
    continue to prevail in our position that our liability to the
    EPA and third parties for claims for environmental cleanup costs
    that had pre-petition triggers have been discharged. A number of
    claimants have asserted claims for environmental cleanup costs
    that had pre-petition triggers, and in each event, the
    A-C Reorganization
    Trust, under its mandate to provide plan of reorganization
    implementation services to us, has responded to such claims,
    generally, by informing claimants that our liabilities were
    discharged in the bankruptcy. Each of such claims has been
    disposed of without material cost. However, there can be no
    assurance that we will not be subject to environmental claims
    relating to pre-bankruptcy activities that would have a
    material, adverse effect on us.

 

    The EPA and certain state agencies continue from time to time to
    request information in connection with various waste disposal
    sites containing products manufactured by us before consummation
    of the plan of reorganization that were disposed of by other
    parties. Although we have been discharged of liabilities with
    respect to hazardous waste sites, we are under a continuing
    obligation to provide information with respect to our products
    to federal and state agencies. The A-C Reorganization Trust,
    under its mandate to provide plan of reorganization
    implementation services to us, has responded to these
    informational requests because pre-bankruptcy activities are
    involved.

 

    We were advised in late 2005 that the A-C Reorganization Trust
    is in the process of terminating and distributing its assets,
    and as a result, we will assume the responsibility of responding
    to claimants and to the EPA and state agencies previously
    undertaken by the A-C Reorganization Trust. However, we have
    been advised by the A-C Reorganization Trust that its cost of
    providing these services has not been material in the past, and
    therefore we do not expect to incur material expenses as a
    result of responding to such requests. However, there can be no
    assurance that we will not be subject to environmental claims
    relating to pre-bankruptcy activities that would have a
    material, adverse effect on us.

 

    We are named as a defendant from time to time in product
    liability lawsuits alleging personal injuries resulting from our
    activities prior to our reorganization involving asbestos. These
    claims are referred to and handled by a special products
    liability trust formed to be responsible for such claims in
    connection with our reorganization. As with environmental
    claims, we do not believe we are liable for product liability
    claims relating to our business prior to our bankruptcy;
    moreover, the products liability trust continues to defend all
    such claims. However, there can be no assurance that we will not
    be subject to material product liability claims in the future.

 

    On December 31, 2004, Mountain Air was named as a defendant
    in an action brought in April 2004 in the District Court of Mesa
    County, Colorado, by the former owner of Mountain Air Drilling
    Service Company, Inc., from whom Mountain Air acquired assets in
    2001. The plaintiff sought to accelerate payment of the note
    issued in connection with the acquisition and sought
    $1.9 million in damages (representing principal and
    interest due under the note). We raised several defenses to the
    plaintiff’s claim. In March 2005, we reached an



    16



Table of Contents


    agreement with the plaintiff to settle an action brought by the
    sellers under the note and paid to the sellers $1.0 million
    on April 1, 2005 and agreed to pay an additional $350,000
    on June 1, 2006, and $150,000 on June 1, 2007, in
    settlement of all amounts due under the promissory note and all
    other claims.

 

    We are involved in various other legal proceedings in the
    ordinary course of businesses. The legal proceedings are at
    different stages; however, we believe that the likelihood of
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.


 

PART II



 







ITEM 5.  


MARKET
    FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER
    MATTERS.




 

MARKET
    PRICE INFORMATION

 

    Our common stock is traded on the American Stock Exchange under
    the symbol “ALY”. Prior to September 13, 2004,
    our common stock was quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board and
    traded sporadically. The following table sets forth, for periods
    prior to September 13, 2004, high and low bid information
    for the common stock, as reported on the OTC
    Bulletin Board, during the periods indicated, and for
    periods since September 13, 2004, high and low sale prices
    of our common stock reported on the American Stock Exchange. The
    quotations reported on the OTC Bulletin Board reflect
    inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or
    commission and may not represent actual transactions. Share
    prices for periods prior to June 10, 2004, set forth herein
    have been adjusted to give retroactive effect to a
    one-to-five
    reverse stock split effected June 10, 2004.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




Calendar Quarter



 


High


 


 


Low


 



 





2003



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





First Quarter
    



 


 


    4.50


 


 


 


    .55


 





Second Quarter
    



 


 


    5.00


 


 


 


    2.25


 





Third Quarter
    



 


 


    4.50


 


 


 


    2.60


 





Fourth Quarter
    



 


 


    6.00


 


 


 


    2.60


 





2004



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





First Quarter
    



 


 


    10.05


 


 


 


    2.55


 





Second Quarter
    



 


 


    10.25


 


 


 


    4.25


 





Third Quarter
    



 


 


    9.75


 


 


 


    4.75


 





Fourth Quarter
    



 


 


    5.40


 


 


 


    3.25


 





2005



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





First Quarter
    



 


 


    7.25


 


 


 


    3.64


 





Second Quarter
    



 


 


    6.00


 


 


 


    4.38


 





Third Quarter
    



 


 


    14.70


 


 


 


    5.65


 





Fourth Quarter
    



 


 


    13.75


 


 


 


    8.61


 





 

Holders

 

    As of March 14, 2006, there were approximately 2,040
    holders of record of our common stock. On March 14, 2006,
    the last sale price for our common stock reported on the
    American Stock Exchange was $13.55 per share.

 

Dividends

 

    No dividends were declared or paid during the past three years,
    and no dividends are anticipated to be declared or paid in the
    foreseeable future. Our credit facilities and the indenture
    governing our senior notes restrict our ability to pay dividends
    on our common stock.



    17



Table of Contents


EQUITY
    COMPENSATION PLAN INFORMATION

 

    The following table provides information as of December 31,
    2005 with respect to the shares of our common stock that may be
    issued under our existing equity compensation plans.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Number of



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Securities to be



 


 


Weighted



 


 


 


 




 


 


Issued Upon



 


 


Average Exercise



 


 


Number of Securities



 




 


 


Exercise of



 


 


Price of



 


 


Remaining Available



 




 


 


Outstanding



 


 


Outstanding



 


 


for Future Issuance



 




 


 


Options, Warrants



 


 


Options, Warrants



 


 


Under Equity



 





Plan Category



 


and Rights


 


 


and Rights


 


 


Compensation Plans


 



 





Equity compensation plans approved
    by security holders
    



 


 


    2,756,067


 


 


    $


    5.18


 


 


 


    210,100


 





Equity compensation plans not
    approved by security holders
    



 


 


    489,243


 


 


    $


    2.97


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


 


    3,245,310


 


 


    $


    4.85


 


 


 


    210,100


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Equity
    Compensation Plans Not Approved By Security
    Holders

 

    These plans comprise the following:

 

    In 1999 and 2000, the Board compensated former and continuing
    Board members who had served from 1989 to March 31, 1999
    without compensation by issuing promissory notes totaling
    $325,000 and by granting stock options to these same
    individuals. Options to purchase 4,800 shares of common
    stock were granted with an exercise price of $13.75. These
    options vested immediately and expire in March 2010. As of
    December 31, 2005, none of these options had been exercised.

 

    On May 31, 2001, our Board granted to one of our directors,
    Leonard Toboroff, an option to purchase 100,000 shares of
    common stock at $2.50 per share, expiring in October 2011.
    The option was granted for services provided by
    Mr. Toboroff to OilQuip prior to our merger with OilQuip
    Rentals, Inc., including providing financial advisory services,
    assisting in OilQuip’s capital structure and assisting
    OilQuip in finding strategic acquisition opportunities. None of
    these options have been exercised.

 

    In February 2001, we issued warrants to purchase
    233,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $0.75 per share and warrants to purchase 67,000 shares
    of our common stock at an exercise price of $5.00 per share
    in connection with a subordinated debt financing. The warrants
    to purchase 233,000 shares were redeemed during December
    2004 for $1.5 million. The remaining 67,000 warrants are
    currently outstanding and expire in February 2011.

 

    In connection with the private placement in April 2004, we
    issued warrants for the purchase of 800,000 shares of our
    common stock at an exercise price of $2.50 per share. A total of
    486,557 of these warrants were exercised in 2005. Warrants for
    4,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $4.65
    were also issued in May 2004 and remain outstanding as of
    December 31, 2005.



    18



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 6.  


SELECTED
    FINANCIAL DATA.




 

SELECTED
    HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION

 

    The following selected historical financial information for each
    of the five years ended December 31, 2005, has been derived
    from our audited consolidated financial statements and related
    notes. This information is only a summary and should be read in
    conjunction with material contained in “Management’s
    Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
    Operations,” which includes a discussion of factors
    materially affecting the comparability of the information
    presented, and in conjunction with our financial statements
    included elsewhere. As discussed in Item 7,
    “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
    Condition and Results of Operations,” we have during the
    past five years effected a number of business combinations and
    other transactions that materially affect the comparability of
    the information set forth below (in thousands, except per share
    amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 


 


2002


 


 


2001


 




 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 


 


(Restated)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



 





Statement of Operations
    Data



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    32,724


 


 


    $


    17,990


 


 


    $


    4,796


 





Income (loss) from operations
    



 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    4,227


 


 


    $


    2,625


 


 


    $


    (1,072


    )


 


    $


    (1,433


    )





Net income (loss) from continuing
    operations
    



 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 


 


    $


    2,927


 


 


    $


    (3,969


    )


 


    $


    (2,273


    )





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common stockholders
    



 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 


 


    $


    2,271


 


 


    $


    (4,290


    )


 


    $


    (4,577


    )





Per Share Data:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net Income (loss) from continuing
    operations per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.58


 


 


    $


    (1.14


    )


 


    $


    (2.88


    )





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    (1.14


    )


 


    $


    (2.88


    )





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 


 


 


    3,927


 


 


 


    3,766


 


 


 


    790


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 


 


 


    5,850


 


 


 


    3,766


 


 


 


    790


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Consolidated Balance Sheet
    Data



 




 


 


As of
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 


 


2002


 


 


2001


 




 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Total Assets
    



 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 


 


    $


    53,662


 


 


    $


    34,778


 


 


    $


    12,465


 





Long-term debt classified as:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Current
    



 


    $


    5,632


 


 


    $


    5,541


 


 


    $


    3,992


 


 


    $


    13,890


 


 


    $


    1,023


 





Long-term
    



 


    $


    54,937


 


 


    $


    24,932


 


 


    $


    28,241


 


 


    $


    7,331


 


 


    $


    6,833


 





Redeemable convertible
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Preferred stock
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    4,171


 


 


    $


    3,821


 


 


    $


    —


 





Stockholders’ equity
    



 


    $


    60,875


 


 


    $


    35,109


 


 


    $


    4,541


 


 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    1,250


 





Book value per share (basic)
    



 


    $


    4.10


 


 


    $


    4.43


 


 


    $


    1.16


 


 


    $


    0.27


 


 


    $


    1.58


 







    19



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 7.  


MANAGEMENT’S
    DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
    OPERATIONS




 

The following discussion and analysis should be read in
    conjunction with our selected historical financial data and our
    accompanying financial statements and the notes to those
    financial statements included elsewhere in this document. The
    following discussion contains forward-looking statements within
    the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
    1995 that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual
    results could differ materially from those anticipated in these
    forward-looking statements as a result of risks and
    uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those discussed
    below under “Risk Factors.”

 

Overview
    of Our Business

 

    We are a multi-faceted oilfield services company that provides
    services and equipment to oil and natural gas exploration and
    production companies, domestically in Texas, Louisiana, New
    Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, and offshore in the Gulf of Mexico,
    and internationally in Mexico. We operate in five sectors of the
    oil and natural gas service industry: directional drilling
    services; casing and tubing services; compressed air drilling
    services; rental tools; and production services.

 

    We derive operating revenues from rates per day and rates per
    job that we charge for the labor and equipment required to
    provide a service. The price we charge for our services depends
    upon several factors, including the level of oil and natural gas
    drilling activity and the competitive environment in the
    particular geographic regions in which we operate. Contracts are
    awarded based on the price, quality of service and equipment,
    and the general reputation and experience of our personnel. The
    demand for drilling services has historically been volatile and
    is affected by the capital expenditures of oil and natural gas
    exploration and development companies, which can fluctuate based
    upon the prices of oil and natural gas or the expectation for
    the prices of oil and natural gas.

 

    The number of working drilling rigs, typically referred to as
    the “rig count,” is an important indicator of activity
    levels in the oil and natural gas industry. The rig count in the
    United States increased from 862 as of December 31, 2002 to
    1,532 on March 10, 2006, according to the Baker Hughes rig
    count. Furthermore, directional and horizontal rig counts
    increased from 283 as of December 31, 2002 to 605 on
    March 10, 2006, which accounted for 32.8% and 39.5% of the
    total U.S. rig count, respectively. Currently, we believe
    that the number of available drilling rigs is insufficient to
    meet the demand for drilling rigs. Consequently, unless a
    significant number of additional drilling rigs are brought
    online, the rig count may not increase substantially despite the
    strong demand.

 

    Our cost of revenues represents all direct and indirect costs
    associated with the operation and maintenance of our equipment.
    The principal elements of these costs are direct and indirect
    labor and benefits, repairs and maintenance of our equipment,
    insurance, equipment rentals, fuel and depreciation. Operating
    expenses do not fluctuate in direct proportion to changes in
    revenues because, among other factors, we have a fixed base of
    inventory of equipment and facilities to support our operations,
    and in periods of low drilling activity we may also seek to
    preserve labor continuity to market our services and maintain
    our equipment.

 

Cyclical
    Nature of Equipment Rental and Services Industry

 

    The oilfield services industry is highly cyclical. The most
    critical factor in assessing the outlook for the industry is the
    worldwide supply and demand for oil and the domestic supply and
    demand for natural gas. The peaks and valleys of demand are
    further apart than those of many other cyclical industries. This
    is primarily a result of the industry being driven by commodity
    demand and corresponding price increases. As demand increases,
    producers raise their prices. The price escalation enables
    producers to increase their capital expenditures. The increased
    capital expenditures ultimately result in greater revenues and
    profits for services and equipment companies. The increased
    capital expenditures also ultimately result in greater
    production which historically has resulted in increased supplies
    and reduced prices.

 

    Demand for our services has been strong throughout 2003, 2004
    and 2005 due to high oil and natural gas prices and increased
    demand and declining production costs for natural gas as
    compared to other energy



    20



Table of Contents


    sources. Management believes the current market fundamentals are
    indicative of a favorable long-term trend of activity in our
    markets. However, these factors could be more than offset by
    other developments affecting the worldwide supply and demand for
    oil and natural gas products.

 

Restatement

 

    We understated diluted earnings per share due to an incorrect
    calculation of our weighted shares outstanding for the third
    quarter of 2003, for each of the first three quarters of 2004,
    for the years ended December 31, 2003 and 2004 and for the
    quarter ended March 31, 2005. In addition, we understated
    basic earnings per share due to an incorrect calculation of our
    weighted average basic shares outstanding for the quarter ended
    September 30, 2004. Consequently, we have restated our
    financial statements for each of those periods. The incorrect
    calculation resulted from a mathematical error and an improper
    application of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards
    No. 128, “Earnings Per Share”, or SFAS,
    No. 128. The effect of the restatement is to reduce
    weighted average diluted shares outstanding for the relevant
    periods and to reduce weighted average basic shares outstanding
    for the quarter ended September 30, 2004. Therefore,
    diluted earnings per share were increased for the relevant
    periods and basic earnings per share were increased for the
    quarter ended September 30, 2004. Based on the correction
    of a mathematical error, for the three and nine months ended
    September 30, 2004, weighted average basic shares
    outstanding was 8,298,000 and 6,168,000, respectively, compared
    to the previously reported weighted average basic shares
    outstanding of 11,599,000 and 7,285,000 for the three and nine
    months ended September 30, 2004. The effect is to increase
    basic earnings per share to $0.06 and $0.21 for the three and
    nine months ended September 30, 2004 compared to the $0.04
    and $0.18 previously reported for those periods. Based on the
    proper allocation of SFAS No. 128, weighted average
    diluted shares outstanding was 9,828,000 and 7,890,000 for the
    three and nine months ended September 30, 2004,
    respectively, compared to the previously reported weighted
    average diluted shares outstanding of 14,407,000 and 9,980,000
    for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2004,
    respectively. The effect is to increase diluted earnings per
    share to $0.05 and $0.18 for the three and nine months ended
    September 30, 2004, respectively, compared to the $0.04 and
    $0.13 previously restated, respectively. (See Note 2 to our
    consolidated financial statements for the three years ended
    December 31, 2005).

 

    In connection with the formation of AirComp in 2003, we, along
    with M-I contributed assets to AirComp in exchange for a 55%
    interest and 45% interest, respectively, in AirComp. We
    originally accounted for the formation of AirComp as a joint
    venture, but in February 2005 determined that the transaction
    should have been accounted for using purchase accounting
    pursuant to SFAS No. 141, “Business
    Combinations” and SEC Staff Accounting
    Bulletin No. 51 “Accounting for Sales of Stock
    by a Subsidiary.” Consequently, we have restated our
    financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2003
    and for the first three quarters of 2004 (See Note 2 to our
    consolidated financial statements for the three years ended
    December 31, 2005).

 

    Management has concluded that the need to restate our financial
    statements resulted, in part, from the lack of sufficient
    experienced accounting personnel, which in turn resulted in a
    lack of effective control over the financial reporting process.

 

    We have implemented a number of actions that we believe address
    the deficiencies in our financial reporting process, including
    the following:

 







 
    • 


    The addition of experienced accounting personnel with
    appropriate experience and qualifications to perform quality
    review procedures and to satisfy our financial reporting
    obligations. During August 2004, we hired a new chief financial
    officer and in October of 2004 we hired a full-time in-house
    general counsel. In March 2005, we hired a certified public
    accountant as our financial reporting manager and in July 2005
    we hired as chief accounting officer, a certified public
    accountant who has significant prior experience as a chief
    accounting officer of a publicly traded company. In 2006, we
    have added three additional certified public accountants in
    connection with the growth of our business and to implement and
    monitor compliance with internal control processes.





    21



Table of Contents

 







 
    • 


    In the fourth quarter of 2004, we engaged an independent
    internal controls consulting firm which is in the process of
    documenting, analyzing, identifying and correcting deficiencies
    and testing our internal controls and procedures, including our
    controls over internal financial reporting.


 

 
    • 


    We are in the final stages of completing the implementation of a
    new accounting software to facilitate timely and accurate
    reporting.



 

    Although we have implemented a number of actions as described
    above, we have not yet had sufficient time to test the newly
    implemented actions.

 

Results
    of Operations

 

    In February 2002, we acquired 81% of the outstanding stock of
    Tubular. In February 2002, we also purchased substantially all
    the outstanding common stock and preferred stock of Strata. The
    results from our casing and tubing services and directional
    drilling services are included in our operating results from
    February 1, 2002.

 

    In July 2003, through our subsidiary Mountain Compressed Air,
    Inc., we entered into a limited liability company agreement with
    M-I, a company owned by Smith International and Schlumberger
    N.V., to form AirComp. We owned 55% and M-I owned 45% of AirComp
    until we purchased M-I’s interest in July 2005. We have
    consolidated AirComp into our financial statements beginning
    with the quarter ending September 30, 2003.

 

    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of Tubular and
    we acquired Safco. In November 2004, AirComp acquired
    substantially all of the assets of Diamond Air and, in December
    2004, we acquired Downhole. We consolidated the results of these
    acquisitions from the day they were acquired.

 

    In April 2005, we acquired Delta and, in May 2005, we acquired
    Capcoil. We report the operations of Downhole and Capcoil as our
    production services segment and the operations of Safco and
    Delta as our rental tools segment. In July 2005, we acquired the
    45% interest of M-I in our compressed air drilling subsidiary,
    AirComp, making us the 100% owner of AirComp. In addition, in
    July 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling assets of W.
    T. On August 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding
    capital stock of Target. The results of Target are included in
    our directional and horizontal drilling segment as their Measure
    While Drilling equipment is utilized in that segment. On
    September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. We consolidated the
    results of these acquisitions from the day they were acquired.

 

    The foregoing acquisitions affect the comparability from period
    to period of our historical results, and our historical results
    may not be indicative of our future results.

 

Comparison
    of Years Ended December 31, 2005 and December 31,
    2004

 

    Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2005 was
    $105.3 million, an increase of 120.8% compared to
    $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2004.
    The increase in revenues was principally due to acquisitions
    completed in the fourth quarter of 2004 and the second and third
    quarters of 2005, the addition of operations and sales
    personnel, the opening of new operations offices, and the
    purchase of additional equipment. Acquisitions completed during
    this period enabled us to establish our rental tool and
    production services segments which resulted in an increased
    offering of products and services and an expansion of our
    customer base. Directional drilling services segment revenues
    increased in the 2005 period compared to the 2004 period due to
    the addition of operations and sales personnel, the opening of
    new operations offices and the purchase of additional downhole
    motors which increased our capacity and market presence.
    Revenues increased at our compressed air drilling segment due to
    acquisition of the air drilling assets of W. T. on July 11,
    2005, the acquisitions of Diamond Air on November 1, 2004
    and improved pricing for our services in West Texas.

 

    Revenues increased at our casing and tubing services segment due
    to the acquisition of the casing and tubing assets of Patterson
    Services Inc. on September 1, 2005, increased revenues from
    Mexico, improved



    22



Table of Contents


    market conditions, improved market penetration for our services
    in South Texas and the addition of operating personnel and
    equipment which broadened our capabilities. Also contributing to
    increased revenues were the acquisitions of Safco as of
    September 1, 2004, Downhole as of December 1, 2004,
    Delta as of April 1, 2005 and Capcoil as of May 1,
    2005. Downhole and Capcoil comprise our production services
    segment and were merged in February 2006 to
    form Allis-Chalmers
    Production Services, Inc. Safco and Delta comprise our rental
    tool segment and were merged in February 2006 with Specialty to
    form Allis-Chalmers
    Rental Tools, Inc.

 

    Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2005
    increased 146.1% to $30.6 million, or 29.0% of revenues,
    compared to $12.4 million, or 26.0%, of revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. The increase is due to
    increased revenues and improved pricing in the directional
    drilling services segment, increased revenues at our compressed
    air drilling services segment, including revenues resulting from
    the acquisition of Diamond Air and the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T., increased revenues from Mexico, improved market
    conditions for our domestic casing and tubing segment and the
    growth of our rental tools segment through the acquisition of
    Delta on April 1, 2005. Depreciation expense increased
    80.4% to $4.9 million in 2005 compared to $2.7 million
    in 2004. The increase is due to additional depreciable assets
    resulting from capital expenditures and acquisitions in 2004 and
    2005. Our cost of revenues consists principally of our labor
    costs and benefits, equipment rentals, maintenance and repairs
    of our equipment, depreciation, insurance and fuel. Because many
    of our costs are fixed, our gross profit as a percentage of
    revenues is generally affected by our level of revenues.

 

    General and administrative expense was $15.9 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to
    $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2004.
    General and administrative expense increased due to the
    additional expenses associated with the acquisitions completed
    in the second half of 2004 and in 2005, and the hiring of
    additional sales and administrative personnel. General and
    administrative expense also increased because of increased legal
    and accounting fees and other expenses related to our financing
    and acquisition activities, increased consulting fees in
    connection with our internal controls and corporate governance
    process, and increased corporate accounting and administrative
    staff. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative
    expenses were 15.1% for 2005 and 14.9% for 2004.

 

    Amortization expense was $1.8 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 compared to $0.9 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in amortization
    expense is due to the amortization of intangible assets in
    connection with our acquisitions and the amortization of
    deferred financing costs.

 

    Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2005
    totaled $13.2 million, a 212.7% increase over the
    $4.2 million in income from operations for the year ended
    December 31, 2004, reflecting the increase in our revenues
    and gross profit, offset in part by increased general and
    administrative expenses.

 

    Our interest expense was $4.4 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, compared to $2.8 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. Interest expense increased
    during 2005 due to the increased borrowings associated with the
    acquisitions completed in the second and third quarters of 2005,
    equipment purchases and higher average interest rates, offset in
    part by the prepayment, in December 2004, of our 12%
    $2.4 million subordinated note. Additionally, in 2005, we
    incurred debt retirement expense of $1.1 million related to
    the refinancing of our debt. This amount includes prepayment
    penalties and the write-off of deferred financing fees from a
    previous financing.

 

    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 was $488,000 compared to $321,000 for the
    corresponding period in 2004 due to the increase in
    profitability at AirComp due in part to the acquisition of
    Diamond Air as of November 1, 2004. The minority interest
    at AirComp was acquired on July 11, 2005 and the minority
    interest in Tubular, which was 19%-owned by director Jens
    Mortensen, was acquired on September 30, 2004.

 

    We had net income attributed to common stockholders of
    $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2005, an
    increase of 839.1%, compared to net income attributed to common
    stockholders of $0.8 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. The net income attributed to common
    stockholders in the 2004 period is after $124,000 in preferred
    stock dividends.



    23



Table of Contents


    The following table compares revenues and income from operations
    for each of our business segments for the years ended
    December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004. Income from
    operations consists of our revenues less cost of revenues,
    general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and
    amortization:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Revenues


 


 


Income (Loss) from
    Operations


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


Change


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


Change


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    43,901


 


 


    $


    24,787


 


 


    $


    19,114


 


 


    $


    7,389


 


 


    $


    3,061


 


 


    $


    4,328


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    25,662


 


 


 


    11,561


 


 


 


    14,101


 


 


 


    5,612


 


 


 


    1,169


 


 


 


    4,443


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    20,932


 


 


 


    10,391


 


 


 


    10,541


 


 


 


    4,994


 


 


 


    3,217


 


 


 


    1,777


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    5,059


 


 


 


    611


 


 


 


    4,448


 


 


 


    1,300


 


 


 


    (71


    )


 


 


    1,371


 





Production services
    



 


 


    9,790


 


 


 


    376


 


 


 


    9,414


 


 


 


    (99


    )


 


 


    4


 


 


 


    (103


    )





General corporate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (5,978


    )


 


 


    (3,153


    )


 


 


    (2,825


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    57,618


 


 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    4,227


 


 


    $


    8,991


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Directional Drilling Services
    Segment.  Revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 for our directional drilling services
    segment were $43.9 million, an increase of 77.1% from the
    $24.8 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. Income from operations increased 141.4%
    to $7.4 million for 2005 from $3.1 million for 2004.
    The improved results for this segment are due to the increase in
    drilling activity in the Texas and Gulf Coast areas, the
    establishment of new operations in West Texas and Oklahoma, the
    addition of operations and sales personnel, the purchase of
    additional downhole motors which increased our capacity and
    market presence and the acquisition of Target, a provider of
    measurement while drilling equipment, effective August 2005. Our
    operating income increased due to higher revenue explained above
    and cost savings achieved as a result of the purchases of most
    of the downhole motors used in directional drilling, which we
    had previously rented.

 

Compressed Air Drilling Services Segment.  Our
    compressed air drilling revenues were $25.7 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2005, an increase of 122.0%
    compared to $11.6 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. Income from operations increased 380.1%
    to $5.6 million in 2005 compared to income from operations
    of $1.2 million in 2004. Our compressed air drilling
    revenues and operating income for the 2005 period increased
    compared to the 2004 period due in part to the acquisition of
    the air drilling assets of W. T., the acquisitions of Diamond
    Air as of November 1, 2004 and improved pricing in West
    Texas.

 

Casing and Tubing Services Segment.  Revenues
    for the year ended December 31, 2005 for the casing and
    tubing services segment were $20.9 million, an increase of
    101.4% from the $10.4 million in revenues for the year
    ended December 31, 2004. Revenues from domestic operations
    increased to $14.5 million in 2005 from $5.2 million
    in 2004 as a result of the acquisition of the casing and tubing
    assets of Patterson Services, Inc. on September 1, 2005,
    improved market conditions for our services in South Texas and
    the addition of personnel which added to our capabilities and
    our offering of services. Revenues from Mexican operations
    increased to $6.4 million in 2005 from $5.2 million in
    2004 as a result of increased drilling activity in Mexico and
    the addition of equipment that increased our capacity. Income
    from operations increased 55.2% to $5.0 million in 2005
    from $3.2 million in 2004. The increase in this
    segment’s operating income is due to increased revenues
    both domestically and in our Mexico operations.

 

Rental Tools Segment.  Our rental tools
    revenues were $5.1 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, an increase of 728.0% compared to
    $0.6 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. Income from operations increased to
    $1.3 million in 2005 compared to a loss from operations of
    $71,000 in 2004. Operations for this segment include Safco,
    acquired in September 2004, and Delta, acquired in April 2005.

 

Production Services Segment.  Our production
    services revenues were $9.8 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, compared to $376,000 in revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. Loss from operations was
    $99,000 in 2005 compared to an operating income of $4,000 in
    2004. Operations for this segment consist of Downhole, acquired
    December 1, 2004, and Capcoil, acquired May 1, 2005.
    We plan to grow this segment and improve profitability by
    increasing our market presence and our critical mass including



    24



Table of Contents


    adding additional capillary and coil tubing units. Our results
    for the year ended December 31, 2005 for this segment were
    negatively affected by costs incurred to expand our
    international presence for production services and by downtime
    experienced by one of our larger coil tubing units.

 

Comparison
    of Years Ended December 31, 2004 and December 31,
    2003

 

    Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2004 was
    $47.7 million, an increase of 45.8% compared to
    $32.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2003.
    Revenues increased due to increased demand for our services due
    to the general increase in oil and gas drilling activity.
    Revenues increased most significantly at our directional
    drilling services segment due to the addition of operations and
    sales personnel, which increased our capacity and market
    presence. Additionally, our compressed air drilling services
    revenues in 2004 increased compared to the 2003 year due to
    the inclusion, for a full year in 2004, of the business
    contributed by M-I in connection with the formation of AirComp
    in July 2003 and the acquisition of Diamond Air on
    November 1, 2004. We have consolidated AirComp into our
    financial statements beginning with the quarter ended
    September 30, 2003. Also contributing to the increase in
    revenues was an increase in Mexico revenues at our casing and
    tubing services segment, which was offset in part by a decrease
    in domestic revenues for this segment due to increased
    competition for casing and tubing services in South Texas.
    Finally in the second half of 2004, we acquired Safco, our
    rental tools subsidiary, as of September 1, and as of
    December 1, 2004, we acquired Downhole, our production
    services subsidiary.

 

    Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2004
    increased 42.9% to $12.4 million, or 26.0% of revenues,
    compared to $8.7 million, or 26.6% of revenues for the year
    ended December 31, 2003, due to the increase in revenues in
    the directional drilling services segment, the compressed air
    drilling services segment and from Mexico, which more than
    offset lower revenues and higher costs in our domestic casing
    and tubing segment. Our cost of revenues consists principally of
    our labor costs and benefits, equipment rentals, maintenance and
    repairs of our equipment, depreciation, insurance and fuel.
    Because many of our costs are fixed, our gross profit as a
    percentage of revenues is generally affected by our level of
    revenues.

 

    General and administrative expense was $7.1 million in the
    2004 period compared to $5.3 million for 2003. General and
    administrative expense increased in 2004 due to additional
    expenses associated with the inclusion of AirComp for a full
    year, the acquisitions completed in the second half of 2004, and
    the hiring of additional sales and administrative personnel at
    each of our subsidiaries. General and administrative expense
    also increased because of increased professional fees and other
    expenses related to our financing and acquisition activities,
    including the listing of our common stock on the American Stock
    Exchange, and increased corporate accounting and administrative
    staff. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative
    expenses were 14.9% in 2004 and 16.2% in 2003.

 

    Depreciation and amortization was $3.6 million for the year
    ended December 31, 2004 compared to $2.9 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2003. The increase was due to
    the inclusion of AirComp for a full year and the increase in our
    assets resulting from our capital expenditures and the
    acquisitions completed in 2004.

 

    Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2004
    totaled $4.2 million, a 61.0% increase over the
    $2.6 million in income from operations for the prior year,
    reflecting the increase in our revenues and gross profit, offset
    in part by an increase in general and administrative expense.
    Income from operations in the year ended December 31, 2004
    includes $188,000 in additional accrued expense for
    post-retirement medical benefits pursuant to our plan of
    reorganization. The increase in this accrued expense was based
    on the present value of the expected retiree benefit obligations
    as determined by a third party actuary. Income from operations
    for the 2003 year includes income of $99,000 which resulted
    from a reduction in projected post-retirement benefits based on
    the third party actuary at the end of 2003.

 

    Our interest expense increased to $2.8 million in 2004,
    compared to $2.5 million for the prior year, in spite of
    the decrease in our total debt. Interest expense in 2004
    includes $359,000 in warrant put amortization including the
    retirement of warrants in connection with the prepayment, in
    December 2004, of our $2.4 million 12.0% subordinated
    note. Interest expense in 2003 includes $216,000 in connection
    with the acceleration, in 2003, of the amortization of a put
    obligation related to subordinated debt at Mountain Compressed
    Air. The



    25



Table of Contents


    subordinated debt including accrued interest was paid off in
    connection with the formation of AirComp in 2003.

 

    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries for the
    2004 year was $321,000 compared to $343,000 for the
    2003 year. The increase in net income at AirComp was offset
    in part by the elimination of minority interest in Tubular,
    which was 19%-owned by director Jens Mortensen until
    September 30, 2004.

 

    We had net income attributed to common stockholders of $764,000
    for the year ended December 31, 2004 compared to net income
    attributed to common stockholders of $2.3 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2003. In 2003, we recognized a
    non-operating gain on sale of an interest in a subsidiary in the
    amount of $2.4 million in connection with the formation of
    AirComp, and recognized a one-time gain of $1.0 million in
    the third quarter of 2003 as a result of settling a lawsuit
    against the former owners of Mountain Air Drilling.

 

    The following table compares revenues and income from operations
    for each of our business segments for the years ended
    December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003. Income from
    operations consists of our revenues less cost of revenues,
    general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and
    amortization:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Revenues


 


 


Income (Loss) from
    Operations


 




 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 


 


Change


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 


 


Change


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    24,787


 


 


    $


    16,008


 


 


    $


    8,779


 


 


    $


    3,061


 


 


    $


    1,103


 


 


    $


    1,958


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    11,561


 


 


 


    6,679


 


 


 


    4,882


 


 


 


    1,169


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    1,152


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    10,391


 


 


 


    10,037


 


 


 


    354


 


 


 


    3,217


 


 


 


    3,628


 


 


 


    (411


    )





Other services
    



 


 


    987


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    987


 


 


 


    (67


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (67


    )





General corporate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,153


    )


 


 


    (2,123


    )


 


 


    (1,030


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    32,724


 


 


    $


    15,002


 


 


    $


    4,227


 


 


    $


    2,625


 


 


    $


    1,602


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Directional Drilling Services
    Segment.  Revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004 for our directional drilling services
    segment were $24.8 million, an increase of 54.8% from the
    $16.0 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2003. Income from operations increased by
    177.5% to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31,
    2004 from $1.1 million for 2003. The improved results for
    this segment are due to the increase in drilling activity in the
    Texas and Gulf Coast areas and the addition of operations and
    sales personnel which increased our capacity and market
    presence. Increased operating expenses as a result of the
    addition of personnel were more than offset by the growth in
    revenues and cost savings as a result of purchases, in late 2003
    and in 2004, of most of the down-hole motors used in directional
    drilling. Previously we had leased these motors.

 

Compressed Air Drilling Services Segment.  Our
    compressed air drilling revenues were $11.6 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2004, an increase of 73.1% compared
    to $6.7 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2003. Income from operations increased to
    $1.2 million in 2004 compared to income from operations of
    $17,000 in 2003. Our compressed air drilling revenues and
    operating income for the 2004 year increased compared to
    the prior year due to the inclusion, for a full year in 2004, of
    the business contributed by M-I, in connection with the
    formation of AirComp in July 2003, and the acquisition of
    Diamond Air as of November 1, 2004.

 

Casing and Tubing Services Segment.  Revenues
    for the year ended December 31, 2004 for the casing and
    tubing services segment were $10.4 million, an increase of
    3.5% from the $10.0 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2003. Revenues from domestic operations
    decreased from $6.3 million in 2003 to $5.1 million in
    the 2004 year as a result of increased competition in South
    Texas, resulting in fewer contracts awarded to us and lower
    pricing for our services. Revenues from Mexican operations,
    however, increased from $3.7 million in 2003 to
    $5.3 million in the 2004 period as a result of increased
    drilling activity in Mexico and the addition of equipment that
    increased our capacity. Income from operations decreased by
    11.3% to $3.2 million in 2004 from $3.6 million in
    2003. The decrease in this segment’s revenues and



    26



Table of Contents


    operating income is due to the decrease in revenues from
    domestic operations and increases in wages and benefits
    domestically, which was partially offset by increased revenues
    from Mexico.

 

Other Services Segment.  Revenues for this
    segment consist of Safco’s rental tool business, beginning
    September 1, 2004, and Downhole’s production services
    beginning December 1, 2004, the effective date of their
    respective acquisitions. Revenues for this segment were $987,000
    with a loss from operations of $67,000. It is our plan to grow
    in these businesses thereby improving profitability as we
    increase our market presence and our critical mass.

 

Liquidity
    and Capital Resources

 

    Our on-going capital requirements arise primarily from our need
    to service our debt, to acquire and maintain equipment, to fund
    our working capital requirements and to complete acquisitions.
    Our primary sources of liquidity are borrowings under our
    revolving lines of credit, other financings, proceeds from the
    issuance of equity securities and cash flows from operations. We
    had cash and cash equivalents of $1.9 million at
    December 31, 2005 compared to $7.3 million at
    December 31, 2004 and compared to $1.3 million at
    December 31, 2003.

 

Operating
    Activities

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2005, we generated
    $3.6 million in cash from operating activities compared to
    $3.3 million in cash from operating activities for the same
    period in 2004. Net income before preferred stock dividend for
    the year ended December 31, 2005 increased to
    $7.2 million, compared to $888,000 in the 2004 period.
    Revenues and income from operations increased in 2005 due to
    increased demand for our services due to the general increase in
    oil and gas drilling activity and the results of acquisitions
    that were completed during the period. Non-cash additions to net
    income totaled $6.8 million in the 2005 period consisting
    of $6.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $488,000
    of minority interest in the income of a subsidiary, $653,000 in
    write-off of financing fees in conjunction with a refinancing,
    offset by decrease of $352,000 in the pension benefit obligation
    and the $669,000 of gain from the disposition of equipment.
    Non-cash additions to net income totaled $4.3 million in
    the 2004 period consisting of $3.6 million of depreciation
    and amortization, $321,000 of minority interest in the income of
    a subsidiary and $350,000 in amortization of discount on debt.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, changes in working
    capital used $10.4 million in cash compared to a use of
    $1.9 million in cash in the 2004 period, principally due,
    in the 2005 period, to an increase of $10.4 million in
    accounts receivable, an increase of $2.1 million in other
    current assets, and a decrease of $97,000 in accrued expenses,
    offset in part by an increase of $2.4 million in accounts
    payable, an increase of $324,000 in accrued interest and a
    increase of $443,000 in accrued employee benefits and payroll
    taxes. Our accounts receivables increased by $10.4 million
    at December 31, 2005 due to the increase in our revenues in
    2005. Other current assets increased $2.1 million due
    primarily to an increase in inventory. Accounts payable
    increased by $2.4 million at December 31, 2005 due to
    the increase in our cost of sales associated with the increase
    in our revenues and the acquisitions completed in 2005 and 2004.

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2004, we generated
    $3.3 million in cash from operating activities compared to
    $1.9 million in cash from operating activities for the same
    period in 2003. Net income before preferred stock dividend for
    the year ended December 31, 2004 decreased to $888,000,
    compared to $2.9 million in the 2003 period. Revenues and
    income from operations increased in 2004 due to increased demand
    for our services due to the general increase in oil and gas
    drilling activity. Net income in 2003 includes a
    $1.0 million gain from the settlement of a lawsuit and a
    $2.4 million non-operating gain on sale of interest in
    AirComp. Non-cash additions to net income totaled
    $4.3 million in the 2004 period consisting of
    $3.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $321,000 of
    minority interest in the income of a subsidiary and $350,000 in
    amortization of discount on debt. Net non-cash additions to net
    income in 2003 totaled $305,000, consisting of depreciation and
    amortization expense of $2.9 million, minority interest in
    the income of a subsidiary of $343,000 and amortization of
    discount on debt of $516,000, offset by the $3.4 million of
    non-cash gains.



    27



Table of Contents


    During the year ended December 31, 2004, changes in working
    capital used $1.9 million in cash compared to a use of
    $1.3 million in cash in the 2003 period, principally due,
    in the 2004 period, to an increase of $2.3 million in
    accounts receivable, an increase of $638,000 in other assets,
    and a decrease of $398,000 in accrued expenses and other
    liabilities, offset in part by an increase of $1.1 million
    in accounts payable and an increase of $299,000 in accrued
    interest. Our accounts receivables increased by
    $2.3 million at December 31, 2004 due to the increase
    in our revenues in 2004. Current assets increased $638,000 due
    primarily to an increase in prepaid insurance premiums. Accounts
    payable increased by $1.1 million at December 31, 2004
    due to the increase in our cost of sales associated with the
    increase in our revenues and the acquisitions completed in the
    fourth quarter of 2004.

 

Investing
    Activities

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, we used
    $53.1 million in investing activities. During the year
    ended December 31, 2005, we completed the following
    acquisitions for a total net cash outlay of $36.9 million:

 







 
    • 


    On April 1, 2005 we acquired Delta for $4.6 million in
    cash, 223,114 shares of our common stock and two promissory
    notes totaling $350,000.


 

 
    • 


    On May 1, 2005, we acquired Capcoil for $2.7 million
    in cash, 168,161 shares of our common stock and the payment
    or assumption of approximately $1.3 million of debt.


 

 
    • 


    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T. for $6.0 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I it’s 45%
    interest in AirComp and subordinated note in the principal
    amount of $4.8 million issued by AirComp, for which we paid
    M-I $7.1 million in cash and reissued a $4.0 million
    subordinated note.


 

 
    • 


    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired Target for
    $1.3 million in cash and forgiveness of a lease receivable
    of $592,000.


 

 
    • 


    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for approximately
    $15.6 million.



 

    In addition we made capital expenditures of approximately
    $17.8 million, including $2.9 million to purchase
    equipment for our directional drilling services segment,
    $7.0 million to purchase and improve equipment in our
    compressed air drilling service segment, $5.2 million to
    purchase and improve our casing equipment and approximately
    $1.5 million to expand our production services segment. We
    also received $1.6 million from the sale of assets during
    the year ended December 31, 2005, comprised mostly from
    equipment lost in the hole from our directional drilling segment
    ($1.0 million) and our rental tool segment ($408,000).

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2004, we used
    $9.1 million in investing activities, consisting
    principally of capital expenditures of approximately
    $4.6 million, including $1.6 million to purchase
    equipment for our directional drilling services segment,
    $1.3 million to purchase casing equipment and
    $1.4 million to make capital repairs to existing equipment
    in our compressed air drilling services segment. During the year
    ended December 31, 2004, we completed the following
    acquisitions for a net cash outlay of $4.6 million.

 







 
    • 


    As of September 1, 2004 we completed, for
    $1.0 million, the acquisition of 100% of the outstanding
    stock of Safco.


 

 
    • 


    As of November 1, 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all
    the assets of Diamond Air for $4.6 million in cash and the
    assumption of approximately $450,000 of debt. We contributed our
    share of the purchase price, or $2.5 million, to AirComp in
    order to fund the purchase.


 

 
    • 


    Effective December 1, 2004, we acquired Downhole for
    approximately $1.1 million in cash, 568,466 shares of
    our common stock and payment or assumption of $950,000 of debt.





    28



Table of Contents

 

    During the 12 month period ended December 31, 2003, we
    used $4.5 million in investing activities, consisting of
    the purchases of equipment of $5.4 million, which was
    partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of equipment of
    $843,000.

 

Financing
    Activities

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, financing
    activities provided a net of $44.1 million in cash. We
    received $56.3 million in borrowings under long-term debt
    facilities, $15.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance
    of 1,761,034 shares of our common stock, $2.5 million
    in net borrowings under our revolving lines of credit and
    $1.4 million from the proceeds of warrant and option
    exercises for 1,076,154 shares of our common stock. The
    proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $28.2 million, repay related party debt of
    $1.5 million and to pay $1.8 million in debt issuance
    costs.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2004, financing
    activities provided a net of $11.8 million in cash. We
    received $16.9 million in net proceeds from the issuance of
    6,081,301 shares of our common stock, $8.2 million in
    borrowings under long-term debt facilities and a $689,000
    increase in net borrowings under our revolving lines of credit.
    The proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $13.5 million and to pay $391,000 in debt issuance costs.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2003, financing
    activities provided a net of $3.8 million in cash. In 2003,
    we received $14.1 million from the issuance of long-term
    debt and $30.5 million from borrowings under our lines of
    credit. These proceeds were used to pay long-term debt in the
    amount of $10.8 million and make principal payments on
    outstanding borrowings under our lines of credit in the amount
    of $29.4 million. We also used $408,000 in cash for debt
    issuance costs in 2003.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we replaced our previous credit agreement
    with a new agreement that provided for the following senior
    secured credit facilities:

 







 
    • 


    A $13.0 million revolving line of credit. Borrowings were
    limited to 85% of eligible accounts receivable plus 50% of
    eligible inventory (up to a maximum of $2.0 million of
    borrowings based on inventory). This line of credit was to be
    used to finance working capital requirements and other general
    corporate purposes, including the issuance of standby letters of
    credit. Outstanding borrowings under this line of credit were
    $6.4 million at a margin above prime and LIBOR rates plus
    margin averaging approximately 8.1% as of December 31, 2005.


 

 
    • 


    Two term loans totaling $42.0 million. Outstanding
    borrowings under these term loans were $42.0 million as of
    December 31, 2005. These loans were at LIBOR rates plus a
    margin which averages approximately 7.8% at December 31,
    2005.



 

    We borrowed against the July 2005 facilities to refinance our
    prior credit facility and the AirComp credit facility, to fund
    the acquisition of M-I’s interest in AirComp and the air
    drilling assets of W.T. and to pay transaction costs related to
    the refinancing and the acquisitions. We incurred debt
    retirement expense of $1.1 million related to the
    refinancing. This amount includes prepayment penalties and the
    write-off of deferred financing fees of the previous financing.

 

    Borrowings under the July 2005 facilities were to mature in July
    2007. Amounts outstanding under the term loans as of July 2006
    were to be repaid in monthly principal payments based on a
    48 month repayment schedule with the remaining balance due
    at maturity. Additionally, during the second year, we were to be
    required to prepay the remaining balance of the term loans by
    75% of excess cash flow, if any, after debt service and capital
    expenditures. The interest rate payable on borrowings was based
    on a margin over the London Interbank Offered Rate, referred to
    as LIBOR, or the prime rate, and there was a 0.5% fee on the
    undrawn portion of the revolving line of credit. The margin over
    LIBOR was to increase by 1.0% in the second year. The July 2005
    credit facilities were secured by substantially all of our
    assets and contained customary events of default and financial
    and other covenants, including limitations on our ability to
    incur additional indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay
    dividends or make other distributions, create liens and sell
    assets.



    29



Table of Contents


    All amounts outstanding under our July 2005 credit agreement
    were paid off with proceeds of our senior notes offering in
    January 2006. We executed an amended and restated credit
    agreement which provides a $25.0 million revolving line of
    credit. For a more detailed description of our new credit
    agreement, please see “— Recent
    Developments” below.

 

    Prior to July 11, 2005, we had a credit agreement dated
    December 7, 2004 that provided for the following credit
    facilities:

 







 
    • 


    A $10.0 million revolving line of credit. Borrowings were
    limited to 85% of eligible accounts receivables, as defined.
    Outstanding borrowings under this line of credit were
    $2.4 million as of December 31, 2004.


 

 
    • 


    A term loan in the amount of $6.3 million to be repaid in
    monthly payments of principal of $105,583 per month. We
    were also required to prepay this term loan by an amount equal
    to 20% of receipts from our largest customer in Mexico. Proceeds
    of the term loan were used to prepay the term loan owed by
    Tubular and to prepay the 12% $2.4 million subordinated
    note and retire its related warrants. The outstanding balance
    was $6.3 million as of December 31, 2004.


 

 
    • 


    A $6.0 million capital expenditure and acquisition line of
    credit. Borrowings under this facility were payable monthly over
    four years beginning in January 2006. Availability of this
    capital expenditure term loan facility was subject to security
    acceptable to the lender in the form of equipment or other
    acquired collateral. There were no outstanding borrowings as of
    December 31, 2004.



 

    These credit facilities were to mature on December 31, 2007
    and were secured by liens on substantially all of our assets.
    The agreement governing these credit facilities contained
    customary events of default and financial covenants. It also
    limited our ability to incur additional indebtedness, make
    capital expenditures, pay dividends or make other distributions,
    create liens and sell assets. Interest accrued at an adjustable
    rate based on the prime rate and was 6.25% as of
    December 31, 2004. We paid a 0.5% per annum fee on the
    undrawn portion of the revolving line of credit and the capital
    expenditure line.

 

    In connection with the acquisition of Tubular and Strata in
    2002, we issued a 12% secured subordinated note in the original
    amount of $3.0 million. In connection with this
    subordinated note, we issued redeemable warrants valued at
    $1.5 million, which were recorded as a discount to the
    subordinated debt and as a liability. The discount was amortized
    over the life of the subordinated note beginning
    February 6, 2002 as additional interest expense of which
    $350,000 and $300,000 were recognized in the years ended
    December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, respectively.
    The debt was recorded at $2.7 million at December 31,
    2003, net of the unamortized portion of the put obligation. On
    December 7, 2004, we prepaid the $2.4 million balance
    of the 12% subordinated note and retired the
    $1.5 million of warrants, with a portion of the proceeds
    from our $6.3 million bank term loan.

 

    Prior to July 11, 2005, our AirComp subsidiary had the
    credit facilities described below. These credit facilities were
    repaid in connection with our acquisition of the minority
    interest in AirComp and the refinancing of our bank credit
    facilities described above.

 







 
    • 


    A $3.5 million bank line of credit. Interest accrued at an
    adjustable rate based on the prime rate. We paid a 0.5% per
    annum fee on the undrawn portion. Borrowings under the line of
    credit were subject to a borrowing base consisting of 80% of
    eligible accounts receivable. The balance at December 31,
    2004 was $1.5 million.


 

 
    • 


    A $7.1 million term loan that accrued interest at an
    adjustable rate based on either LIBOR or the prime rate.
    Principal payments of $286,000 plus interest were due quarterly,
    with a final maturity date of June 27, 2007. The balance at
    December 31, 2004 was $6.8 million.


 

 
    • 


    A “delayed draw” term loan facility in the amount of
    $1.5 million to be used for capital expenditures. Interest
    accrued at an adjustable rate based on either the LIBOR or the
    prime rate. Quarterly principal payments were to commence on
    March 31, 2006 in an amount equal to 5.0% of the
    outstanding balance as of December 31, 2005, with a final
    maturity of June  27, 2007. There were no borrowings
    outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2004.





    30



Table of Contents

 

    The AirComp credit facilities were secured by liens on
    substantially all of AirComp’s assets. The agreement
    governing these credit facilities contained customary events of
    default and required that AirComp satisfy various financial
    covenants. It also limited AirComp’s ability to incur
    additional indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay
    dividends or make other distributions, create liens and sell
    assets. We guaranteed 55% of the obligations of AirComp under
    these facilities.

 

    Tubular had two bank term loans with a remaining balance
    totaling $90,000 and $263,000 at December 31, 2005 and
    2004, with interest accruing at a floating interest rate based
    on prime plus 2.0%. The interest rate was 9.25% and 7.25% at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004. Monthly principal payments are
    $13,000 plus interest. The maturity date of one of the loans,
    with a balance of $60,000, was September 17, 2006, while
    the second loan, with a balance of $30,000, had a final maturity
    of January 12, 2007. The balances of these two loans were
    repaid in full in January 2006 with the proceeds from our senior
    notes offering.

 

    AirComp had a subordinated note payable to M-I in the amount of
    $4.8 million bearing interest at an annual rate of 5.0%. In
    2007 each party had the right to cause AirComp to sell its
    assets (or the other party may buy out such party’s
    interest), and in such event, this note (including accrued
    interest) was due and payable. The note was also due and payable
    if M-I sells its interest in AirComp or upon a termination of
    AirComp. At December 31, 2004, $376,000 of interest was
    included in accrued interest. On July 11, 2005, we acquired
    from M-I its 45% equity interest in AirComp and the subordinated
    note in the principal amount of $4.8 million issued by
    AirComp, for which we paid M-I $7.1 million in cash and
    issued a new $4.0 million subordinated note bearing
    interest at 5% per annum. The subordinated note issued to
    M-I requires quarterly interest payments and the principal
    amount is due October 9, 2007. Contingent upon a future
    equity offering, the subordinated note is convertible into up to
    700,000 shares of our common stock at a conversion price
    equal to the market value of the common stock at the time of
    conversion.

 

    Tubular had a subordinated note payable to Jens Mortensen, the
    seller of Tubular and one of our directors, in the amount of
    $4.0 million with a fixed interest rate of 7.5%. Interest
    was payable quarterly and the final maturity of the note is
    January 31, 2006. The subordinated note was subordinated to
    the rights of our bank lenders. The balance outstanding for this
    note at December 31, 2005 and 2004 was $3.0 and
    $4.0 million, respectively. The balance of this
    subordinated note was repaid in full in January 2006 with
    proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 

    As part of the acquisition of Mountain Air in 2001, we issued a
    note to the sellers of Mountain Air in the original amount of
    $2.2 million accruing interest at a rate of 5.75% per
    annum. The note was reduced to $1.5 million as a result of
    the settlement of a legal action against the sellers in 2003. In
    March 2005, we reached an agreement with the sellers and holders
    of the note as a result of an action brought against us by the
    sellers. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid the holders
    of the note $1.0 million in cash, and agreed to pay an
    additional $350,000 on June 1, 2006, and an additional
    $150,000 on June 1, 2007, in settlement of all claims. (See
    “Item 3. Legal Proceedings”). At
    December 31, 2005 and 2004 the outstanding amounts due were
    $500,000 and $1.6 million.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Delta, we issued to the
    sellers a note in the amount of $350,000. The note bears
    interest at 2% and the principal and accrued interest is due on
    April 1, 2006.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Tubular, we agreed to pay a
    total of $1.2 million to Mr. Mortensen in exchange for
    a non-compete agreement. Monthly payments of $20,576 are due
    under this agreement through January 31, 2007. In
    connection with the purchase of Safco, we also agreed to pay a
    total of $150,000 to the sellers in exchange for a non-compete
    agreement. We are required to make annual payments of $50,000
    through September 30, 2007. In connection with the purchase
    of Capcoil, we agreed to pay a total of $500,000 to two
    management employees in exchange for non-compete agreements. We
    are required to make annual payments of $110,000 through May
    2008. Total amounts due under non-compete agreements at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004 were $698,000 and $664,000,
    respectively.

 

    In 2000 we compensated directors, including current directors
    Nederlander and Toboroff, who served on the board of directors
    from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation, by
    issuing promissory notes



    31



Table of Contents


    totaling $325,000. The notes bear interest at the rate of 5.0%.
    At December 31, 2005 and 2004, the principal and accrued
    interest on these notes totaled approximately $96,000 and
    $402,000, respectively.

 

    Our subsidiary, Downhole, had notes payable to two former
    shareholders totaling $49,000. We were required to make monthly
    payments of $8,878 through June 30, 2005. At
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, the amounts outstanding were $0
    and $49,000.

 

    We also had a real estate loan which was payable in equal
    monthly installments of $4,344 with the remaining outstanding
    balance due on January 1, 2010. The loan had a floating
    interest rate based on prime plus 2.0%. The outstanding
    principal balance was $548,000 at December 31, 2005. The
    balance of this loan was prepaid in full in January 2006 with
    proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 

    In December 2003, Strata, our directional drilling subsidiary,
    entered into a financing agreement with a major supplier of
    downhole motors for repayment of motor lease and repair cost
    totaling $1.7 million. The agreement provided for repayment
    of all amounts not later than December 30, 2005. Payment of
    interest was due monthly and principal payments of $582,000 were
    due on April 2005 and December 2005. The interest rate was fixed
    at 8.0%. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the outstanding
    balance was $0 and $1.2 million.

 

    We have various equipment financing loans with interest rates
    ranging from 5% to 11.5% and terms ranging from 2 to
    5 years. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the
    outstanding balances for equipment financing loans were
    $1.9 million and $530,000, respectively. We also have
    various capital leases with terms that expire in 2008. As of
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, amounts outstanding under
    capital leases were $917,000 and $0, respectively. In 2006, we
    prepaid $350,000 of the outstanding equipment loans with
    proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 

    Until December 2004, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman,
    Munawar H. Hidayatallah and his wife were personal guarantors of
    substantially all of our financing. In December 2004, we
    refinanced most of our outstanding bank debt and obtained the
    release of certain guarantees. After the refinancing, Mr.
    Hidayatallah continued to guarantee the Tubular subordinated
    seller note until July 2005. We paid Mr. Hidayatallah an
    annual guarantee fee equal to one-quarter of one percent of the
    total amount of the debt guaranteed by Mr. Hidayatallah. These
    fees aggregated to $7,250 during 2005.

 

    The following table summarizes our obligations and commitments
    to make future payments under our notes payable, operating
    leases, employment contracts and consulting agreements for the
    periods specified as of December 31, 2005.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Payments by Period


 




 


 


 


 


 


Less Than



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Total


 


 


1 Year


 


 


2-3 Years


 


 


4-5 Years


 


 


After 5 Years


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Contractual
    Obligations



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Notes Payable
    



 


    $


    59,652


 


 


    $


    5,158


 


 


    $


    53,887


 


 


    $


    607


 


 


    $


    —


 





Capital leases(a)
    



 


 


    917


 


 


 


    474


 


 


 


    443


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Interest Payments on notes payable
    



 


 


    7,076


 


 


 


    4,186


 


 


 


    2,839


 


 


 


    51


 


 


 


    —


 





Operating Lease
    



 


 


    2,878


 


 


 


    926


 


 


 


    1,462


 


 


 


    490


 


 


 


    —


 





Employment Contracts
    



 


 


    4,016


 


 


 


    2,512


 


 


 


    1,504


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Contractual Cash Obligations
    



 


    $


    74,539


 


 


    $


    13,256


 


 


    $


    60,135


 


 


    $


    1,148


 


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

 








    (a) 


    These amounts represent our minimum capital lease payments, net
    of interest payments totaling $69,000.


 

    We have no off balance sheet arrangements, other than normal
    operating leases and employee contracts shown above, that have
    or are likely to have a current or future material effect on our
    financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues,
    expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures
    or capital resources. We do not guarantee obligations of any
    unconsolidated entities.



    32



Table of Contents


    We have identified capital expenditure projects that will
    require up to approximately $15.0 million in 2006,
    exclusive of any acquisitions. We believe that our current cash
    generated from operations, cash available under our credit
    facilities and cash on hand will provide sufficient funds for
    our identified projects.

 

    We intend to implement a growth strategy of increasing the scope
    of services through both internal growth and acquisitions. We
    are regularly involved in discussions with a number of potential
    acquisition candidates. We expect to make capital expenditures
    to acquire and to maintain our existing equipment. Our
    performance and cash flow from operations will be determined by
    the demand for our services which in turn are affected by our
    customers’ expenditures for oil and gas exploration and
    development and industry perceptions and expectations of future
    oil and gas prices in the areas where we operate. We will need
    to refinance our existing debt facilities as they become due and
    provide funds for capital expenditures and acquisitions. To
    effect our expansion plans, we will require additional equity or
    debt financing in excess of our current working capital and
    amounts available under credit facilities. There can be no
    assurance that we will be successful in raising the additional
    debt or equity capital or that we can do so on terms that will
    be acceptable to us.

 

Recent
    Developments

 

    In January of 2006, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty Rental Tools, Inc. for $96.0 million in cash.
    Specialty, located in Lafayette, Louisiana, is engaged in the
    rental of high quality drill pipe, heavy weight spiral drill
    pipe, tubing work strings, blow-out preventors, choke manifolds
    and various valves and handling tools for oil and natural gas
    drilling. During the nine months ended September 30, 2005,
    Specialty generated aggregate revenues of $21.8 million.

 

    In January of 2006, we closed on a private offering, to
    qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under
    the Securities Act of 1933, of $160.0 million principal
    amount of our 9.0% senior notes due 2014, which we refer to
    as our senior notes. The proceeds of the offering were used to
    fund the acquisition of Specialty, to repay existing debt and
    for general corporate purposes.

 

    In January of 2006, we amended and restated our July 2005 credit
    agreement to increase our borrowing capacity by exchanging the
    existing two year $55.0 million facility for a new four
    year $25.0 million facility. We refer to the July 2005
    credit agreement, as so amended and restated, as our new credit
    agreement. All amounts outstanding under the previous
    $55.0 million credit facility were repaid with proceeds
    from the issuance of our senior notes. The new credit
    agreement’s interest rate is based on a margin over LIBOR
    or the prime rate, and there is a 0.5% fee for the undrawn
    portion. The credit facility is secured by a first priority lien
    on substantially all of our assets. As of March 15, 2006,
    there are no borrowings under this facility.

 

    In January 2006, with proceeds from the sale of our senior notes
    we also prepaid the $3.0 million subordinated seller note
    due to Jens Mortensen, the $548,000 real estate loan and
    $430,000 in various outstanding term and equipment loans.

 

    In February of 2006, David Groshoff resigned from our Board of
    Directors and the Audit Committee. Mr. Groshoff served on
    our Board since 1999, initially under an agreement on behalf of
    the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, which is a client of
    Mr. Groshoff’s employer. That agreement permitted the
    PBGC to appoint a member to our Board so long as the PBGC held a
    minimum number of shares of Allis-Chalmers stock. The PBGC sold
    all its stock in Allis-Chalmers in August 2005. As an investment
    management employee of JPMorgan Asset Management,
    Mr. Groshoff is subject to his employer’s policies
    which generally prohibit employees from serving on public
    company boards of directors without a meaningful client interest
    in such companies. In light of the PBGC’s sale of
    Allis-Chalmers stock, these policies required
    Mr. Groshoff’s resignation from our Board. In March
    2006, Robert Nederlander was appointed to the Audit Committee to
    replace Mr. Groshoff.

 

    Through March 13, 2006, we received proceeds of
    approximately $784,000 from the exercise of 313,000 warrants.



    33



Table of Contents


Critical
    Accounting Policies

 

    We have identified the policies below as critical to our
    business operations and the understanding of our results of
    operations. The impact and any associated risks related to these
    policies on our business operations is discussed throughout
    Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
    and Results of Operations where such policies affect our
    reported and expected financial results. For a detailed
    discussion on the application of these and other accounting
    policies, see Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated
    Financial Statements included elsewhere in this document. Our
    preparation of this report requires us to make estimates and
    assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and
    liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at
    the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts
    of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. There can
    be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those
    estimates.

 

Allowance For Doubtful Accounts.  The
    determination of the collectibility of amounts due from our
    customers requires us to use estimates and make judgments
    regarding future events and trends, including monitoring our
    customer payment history and current credit worthiness to
    determine that collectibility is reasonably assured, as well as
    consideration of the overall business climate in which our
    customers operate. Those uncertainties require us to make
    frequent judgments and estimates regarding our customers’
    ability to pay amounts due us in order to determine the
    appropriate amount of valuation allowances required for doubtful
    accounts. Provisions for doubtful accounts are recorded when it
    becomes evident that the customers will not be able to make the
    required payments at either contractual due dates or in the
    future.

 

Revenue Recognition.  We provide rental
    equipment and drilling services to our customers at per day and
    per job contractual rates and recognize the drilling related
    revenue as the work progresses and when collectibility is
    reasonably assured. The Securities and Exchange
    Commission’s Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104,
    Revenue Recognition in Financial Statements, provides
    guidance on the SEC staff’s views on application of
    generally accepted accounting principles to selected revenue
    recognition issues. Our revenue recognition policy is in
    accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
    SAB No. 104.

 

Impairment Of Long-Lived Assets.  Long-lived
    assets, which include property, plant and equipment, goodwill
    and other intangibles, comprise a significant amount of our
    total assets. We make judgments and estimates in conjunction
    with the carrying value of these assets, including amounts to be
    capitalized, depreciation and amortization methods and useful
    lives. Additionally, the carrying values of these assets are
    reviewed for impairment or whenever events or changes in
    circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be
    recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded in the period in
    which it is determined that the carrying amount is not
    recoverable. This requires us to make long-term forecasts of our
    future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to
    review. These forecasts require assumptions about demand for our
    products and services, future market conditions and
    technological developments. Significant and unanticipated
    changes to these assumptions could require a provision for
    impairment in a future period.

 

Goodwill And Other Intangibles.  As of
    December 31, 2005, we have recorded approximately
    $12.4 million of goodwill and $6.8 million of other
    identifiable intangible assets. We perform purchase price
    allocations to intangible assets when we make a business
    combination. Business combinations and purchase price
    allocations have been consummated for acquisitions in all of our
    reportable segments. The excess of the purchase price after
    allocation of fair values to tangible assets is allocated to
    identifiable intangibles and thereafter to goodwill.
    Subsequently, we perform our initial impairment tests and annual
    impairment tests in accordance with Financial Accounting
    Standards Board No. 141, Business Combinations, and
    Financial Accounting Standards Board No. 142, Goodwill
    and Other Intangible Assets. These initial valuations used
    two approaches to determine the carrying amount of the
    individual reporting units. The first approach is the Discounted
    Cash Flow Method, which focuses on our expected cash flow. In
    applying this approach, the cash flow available for distribution
    is projected for a finite period of years. Cash flow available
    for distribution is defined as the amount of cash that could be
    distributed as a dividend without impairing our future
    profitability or operations. The cash flow available for
    distribution and the terminal value (our value at the end of the
    estimation period) are then discounted to present value to
    derive an indication of value of the business enterprise. This
    valuation method is dependent upon the assumptions made
    regarding future cash flow and cash requirements. The second
    approach is the Guideline Company Method which focuses on
    comparing us to



    34



Table of Contents


    selected reasonably similar publicly traded companies. Under
    this method, valuation multiples are: (i) derived from
    operating data of selected similar companies;
    (ii) evaluated and adjusted based on our strengths and
    weaknesses relative to the selected guideline companies; and
    (iii) applied to our operating data to arrive at an
    indication of value. This valuation method is dependent upon the
    assumption that our value can be evaluated by analysis of our
    earnings and our strengths and weaknesses relative to the
    selected similar companies. Significant and unanticipated
    changes to these assumptions could require a provision for
    impairment in a future period.

 

Recently
    Issued Accounting Standards 

 

    In May 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154,
    Accounting Changes and Error Corrections.
    SFAS No. 154 requires retroactive application of a
    voluntary change in accounting principle to prior period
    financial statements unless it is impracticable.
    SFAS No. 154 also requires that a change in method of
    depreciation, amortization or depletion for long-lived,
    non-financial assets be accounted for as a change in accounting
    estimate that is affected by a change in accounting principle.
    SFAS No. 154 replaces APB Opinion No. 20,
    “Accounting Changes” and SFAS No. 3,
    “Reporting Accounting Changes in Interim Financial
    Statements”. SFAS No. 154 is effective for fiscal
    years beginning after December 15, 2005. We will adopt the
    provisions of SFAS No. 154 as of January 1, 2006
    and do not expect that its adoption will have a material impact
    on our results of operations or financial condition.

 

    In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123R,
    Share-Based Payment. SFAS 123R revises
    SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based
    Compensation, and focuses on accounting for share-based
    payments for services by employer to employee. The statement
    requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants
    of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial
    statements based on their fair values. We have adopted
    SFAS 123R as of January 1, 2006 and will use the
    modified prospective transition method, utilizing the
    Black-Scholes option pricing model for the calculation of the
    fair value of our employee stock options. Under the modified
    prospective method, stock option awards that are granted,
    modified or settled after January 1, 2006 will be measured
    and accounted for in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R).
    Compensation cost for awards granted prior to, but not vested,
    as of January 1, 2006 would be based on the grant date
    attributes originally used to value those awards for pro forma
    purposes under SFAS No. 123. We believe that the
    adoption of this standard will result in an expense of
    approximately $3.2 million, or a reduction in diluted
    earnings per share of approximately $0.18 per share for the
    full calendar year 2006. This estimate assumes no additional
    grants of stock options beyond those outstanding as of
    December 31, 2005. We have retained the services of a
    compensation consulting firm to advise us on alternatives for
    long-term incentive programs, including the future use of stock
    options, if any, and other forms of incentive compensation. This
    estimate is based on many assumptions including the level of
    stock option grants expected in 2006, our stock price, and
    significant assumptions in the option valuation model including
    volatility and the expected life of options. Actual expenses
    could differ from the estimate.

 

    In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151,
    Inventory Costs — an Amendment of ARB
    No. 43, Chapter 4, which amends the guidance in ARB
    No. 43 to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of
    idle facility expense, freight, handling costs and wasted
    material. SFAS No. 151 requires that these items be
    recognized as current period charges. In addition,
    SFAS No. 151 requires the allocation of fixed
    production overheads to inventory based on the normal capacity
    of the production facilities. We are required to adopt
    provisions of SFAS 151, on a prospective basis, as of
    January 1, 2006. We do not believe the adoption of
    SFAS 151 will have a material impact on our future results
    of operations.

 

Risk
    Factors

 

    This Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    (including without limitation the following Risk Factors)
    contains forward-looking statements (within the meaning of
    Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
    Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of
    1934) regarding our business, financial condition, results
    of operations and prospects. Words such as expects, anticipates,
    intends, plans, believes, seeks, estimates and similar
    expressions or variations of such words are intended to identify
    forward-looking statements, but are not the exclusive means of
    identifying forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K.



    35



Table of Contents


    Although forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such
    statements can only be based on facts and factors we currently
    know about. Consequently, forward-looking statements are
    inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, and actual
    results and outcomes may differ materially from the results and
    outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors
    that could cause or contribute to such differences in results
    and outcomes include, but are not limited to, those discussed
    below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    and in our other SEC filings and publicly available documents.
    Readers are urged not to place undue reliance on these
    forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of
    this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K.
    We undertake no obligation to revise or update any
    forward-looking statements in order to reflect any event or
    circumstance that may arise after the date of this Annual Report
    on
    Form 10-K.

 

Risks
    Associated With an Investment in Our Common Stock

 

Our
    stock price may decrease in response to various factors, which
    could adversely affect our business and cause our stockholders
    to suffer significant losses. These factors
    include:

 







 
    • 


    decreases in prices for oil and natural gas resulting in
    decreased demand for our services;


 

 
    • 


    variations in our operating results and failure to meet
    expectations of investors and analysts;


 

 
    • 


    increases in interest rates;


 

 
    • 


    the loss of customers;


 

 
    • 


    failure of customers to pay for our services;


 

 
    • 


    competition;


 

 
    • 


    illiquidity of the market for our common stock;


 

 
    • 


    sales of common stock by existing stockholders; and


 

 
    • 


    other developments affecting us or the financial markets.



 

    A reduced stock price will result in a loss to investors and
    will adversely affect our ability to issue stock to fund our
    activities.

 

Existing
    stockholders’ interest in us may be diluted by additional
    issuances of equity securities.

 

    We expect to issue additional equity securities to fund the
    acquisition of additional businesses and pursuant to employee
    benefit plans. We may also issue additional equity for other
    purposes. These securities may be on parity with our common
    stock or may have dividend, liquidation, or other preferences to
    our common stock. The issuance of additional equity securities
    will dilute the holdings of existing stockholders and may reduce
    the share price of our common stock.

 

We do
    not expect to pay dividends on our common stock and investors
    will be able to receive cash in respect of the shares of common
    stock only upon the sale of the shares.

 

    We have not within the last ten years paid any cash dividends on
    our common stock. We have no intention in the foreseeable future
    to pay any cash dividends on our common stock and our new credit
    agreement and the indenture governing our senior notes restrict
    our ability to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore an
    investor in our common stock, in all likelihood, will obtain an
    economic benefit from the common stock only by selling the
    common stock.



    36



Table of Contents


Risks
    Associated With Our Indebtedness

 

We
    have a substantial amount of debt which could adversely affect
    our financial health and prevent us from making principal and
    interest payments on our senior notes and our other
    debt.

 

    As of December 31, 2005, after giving effect to the sale of
    the senior notes in January of 2006, the application of the
    proceeds therefrom, and the closing of our new credit agreement,
    as if each such transaction had occurred on that date, we had
    approximately $168.2 million of consolidated total
    indebtedness outstanding and approximately $24.4 million of
    additional secured borrowing capacity available under our new
    credit agreement.

 

    Our substantial debt could:

 







 
    • 


    make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with
    respect to our senior notes and our other debt;


 

 
    • 


    increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and
    industry conditions, including declines in oil and natural gas
    prices and declines in drilling activities;


 

 
    • 


    limit our ability to obtain additional financing for future
    working capital, capital expenditures, mergers and other general
    corporate purposes;


 

 
    • 


    require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow
    from operations to payments on our debt, thereby reducing the
    availability of our cash flow for operations and other purposes;


 

 
    • 


    limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes
    in our business and the industry in which we operate;


 

 
    • 


    make us more vulnerable to increases in interest rates;


 

 
    • 


    place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our
    competitors that have less debt; and


 

 
    • 


    have a material adverse effect on us if we fail to comply with
    the covenants in the indenture relating to our senior notes or
    in the instruments governing our other debt.



 

    In addition, we may incur substantial additional debt in the
    future. The indenture governing our senior notes permits us to
    incur additional debt, and our new credit agreement permits
    additional borrowings. If new debt is added to our current debt
    levels, these related risks could increase.

 

    We may not maintain sufficient revenues to sustain profitability
    or to meet our capital expenditure requirements and our
    financial obligations. Also, we may not be able to generate a
    sufficient amount of cash flow to meet our debt service
    obligations.

 

    Our ability to make scheduled payments or to refinance our
    obligations with respect to our debt will depend on our
    financial and operating performance, which, in turn, is subject
    to prevailing economic conditions and to certain financial,
    business, and other factors beyond our control. If our cash flow
    and capital resources are insufficient to fund our debt service
    obligations, we may be forced to reduce or delay scheduled
    expansion and capital expenditures, sell material assets or
    operations, obtain additional capital or restructure our debt.
    We cannot assure you that our operating performance, cash flow
    and capital resources will be sufficient for payment of our debt
    in the future. In the event that we are required to dispose of
    material assets or operations or restructure our debt to meet
    our debt service and other obligations, we cannot assure you
    that the terms of any such transaction would be satisfactory to
    us or if or how soon any such transaction could be completed.

 

If we
    fail to obtain additional financing, we may be unable to
    refinance our existing debt, expand our current operations or
    acquire new businesses, which could result in a failure to grow
    or result in defaults in our obligations under our new credit
    agreement or our senior notes.

 

    In order to refinance indebtedness, expand existing operations
    and acquire additional businesses, we will require substantial
    amounts of capital. There can be no assurance that financing,
    whether from equity or debt



    37



Table of Contents


    financings or other sources, will be available or, if available,
    will be on terms satisfactory to us. If we are unable to obtain
    such financing, we will be unable to acquire additional
    businesses and may be unable to meet our obligations under our
    new credit agreement or our senior notes.

 

The
    indenture governing our senior notes and our new credit
    agreement impose restrictions on us that may limit the
    discretion of management in operating our business and that, in
    turn, could impair our ability to meet our obligations under the
    senior notes.

 

    The indenture governing our senior notes and our new credit
    agreement contain various restrictive covenants that limit
    management’s discretion in operating our business. In
    particular, these covenants limit our ability to, among other
    things:

 







 
    • 


    incur additional debt;


 

 
    • 


    make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on
    our capital stock or purchase or redeem or retire capital stock;


 

 
    • 


    sell assets, including capital stock of our restricted
    subsidiaries;


 

 
    • 


    restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries;


 

 
    • 


    create liens;


 

 
    • 


    enter into transactions with affiliates; and


 

 
    • 


    merge or consolidate with another company.



 

    The new credit agreement also requires us to maintain specified
    financial ratios and satisfy certain financial tests. Our
    ability to maintain or meet such financial ratios and tests may
    be affected by events beyond our control, including changes in
    general economic and business conditions, and we cannot assure
    you that we will maintain or meet such ratios and tests or that
    the lenders under the new credit agreement will waive any
    failure to meet such ratios or tests.

 

    These covenants could materially and adversely affect our
    ability to finance our future operations or capital needs.
    Furthermore, they may restrict our ability to expand, to pursue
    our business strategies and otherwise to conduct our business.
    Our ability to comply with these covenants may be affected by
    circumstances and events beyond our control, such as prevailing
    economic conditions and changes in regulations, and we cannot
    assure you that we will be able to comply. A breach of these
    covenants could result in a default under the indenture
    governing our senior notes
    and/or the
    new credit agreement. If there were an event of default under
    the indenture governing our senior notes
    and/or the
    new credit agreement, the affected creditors could cause all
    amounts borrowed under these instruments to be due and payable
    immediately. Additionally, if we fail to repay indebtedness
    under our new credit agreement when it becomes due, the lenders
    under the new credit agreement could proceed against the assets
    which we have pledged to them as security. Our assets and cash
    flow might not be sufficient to repay our outstanding debt in
    the event of a default.

 

Risks
    Associated With Our Company

 

We may
    fail to acquire additional businesses, which will restrict our
    growth and may result in a decrease in our stock
    price.

 

    Our business strategy is to acquire companies operating in the
    oil and natural gas equipment rental and services industry.
    However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in
    acquiring any additional companies. Successful acquisition of
    new companies will depend on various factors, including but not
    limited to:

 







 
    • 


    our ability to obtain financing;


 

 
    • 


    the competitive environment for acquisitions; and


 

 
    • 


    the integration and synergy issues described in the next risk
    factor.





    38



Table of Contents

 

    There can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire and
    successfully operate any particular business or that we will be
    able to expand into areas that we have targeted. The price of
    the common stock may fall if we fail to acquire additional
    businesses.

 

Difficulties
    in integrating acquired businesses may result in reduced
    revenues and income.

 

    We may not be able to successfully integrate the businesses of
    our operating subsidiaries or any business we may acquire in the
    future. The integration of the businesses will be complex and
    time consuming, will place a significant strain on management,
    and may disrupt our businesses. We may be adversely impacted by
    unknown liabilities of acquired businesses. We may encounter
    substantial difficulties, costs and delays involved in
    integrating common accounting, information and communication
    systems, operating procedures, internal controls and human
    resources practices, including incompatibility of business
    cultures and the loss of key employees and customers. These
    difficulties may reduce our ability to gain customers or retain
    existing customers, and may increase operating expenses,
    resulting in reduced revenues and income and a failure to
    realize the anticipated benefits of acquisitions.

 

    In particular, our recent acquisition of Specialty has been our
    largest acquisition to date and may pose greater integration
    risks than our previous acquisitions. Furthermore, by acquiring
    Specialty with cash from the proceeds of our recent senior notes
    offering, we will depend on Specialty’s continued
    performance as a source of cash flow to service our debt
    obligations.

 

    We have made numerous acquisitions during the past five years.
    As a result of these transactions, our past performance is not
    indicative of future performance, and investors should not base
    their expectations as to our future performance on our
    historical results.

 

Failure
    to maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or
    internal controls over financial reporting could have a material
    adverse effect on our operations.

 

    As disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial
    statements included elsewhere in this report and under the
    caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
    Financial Condition and Results of
    Operations — Restatement,” we understated
    diluted earnings per share due to an incorrect calculation of
    our weighted shares outstanding for the third quarter of 2003,
    for each of the first three quarters of 2004, for the years
    ended December 31, 2003 and 2004 and for the quarter ended
    March 31, 2005. In addition, we understated basic earnings
    per share due to an incorrect calculation of our weighted
    average basic shares outstanding for the quarter ended
    September 30, 2004. Consequently, we have restated our
    financial statements for each of those periods. The incorrect
    calculation resulted from a mathematical error and an improper
    application of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, or
    SFAS, No. 128, Earnings Per Share. Management has
    concluded that the need to restate our financial statements
    resulted, in part, from the lack of sufficient experienced
    accounting personnel, which in turn resulted in a lack of
    effective control over the financial reporting process.

 

    In addition, as part of our growth strategy, we have recently
    completed several acquisitions of privately-held businesses,
    including closely-held entities, and in the future, we may make
    additional strategic acquisitions of privately-held businesses.
    Prior to becoming part of our consolidated company, these
    acquired businesses have not been required to implement or
    maintain the disclosure controls and procedures or internal
    controls over financial reporting that federal law requires of
    publicly-held companies such as ours. Similarly, it is likely
    that our future acquired businesses will not have been required
    to maintain such disclosure controls and procedures or internal
    controls prior to their acquisition. We are in the process of
    creating and implementing appropriate disclosure controls and
    procedures and internal controls over financial reporting at
    each of our recently acquired businesses. However, we have not
    yet completed this process and cannot assure you as to when the
    process will be complete. Likewise, upon the completion of any
    future acquisition, we will be required to integrate the
    acquired business into our consolidated company’s system of
    disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over
    financial reporting, but we cannot assure you as to how long the
    integration process may take for any business that we may
    acquire. Furthermore, during the integration



    39



Table of Contents


    process, we may not be able to fully implement our consolidated
    disclosure controls and internal controls over financial
    reporting.

 

    Also, during the fourth quarter of 2005, we failed to timely
    file a Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    relating to the issuance of shares of our common stock in
    connection with recent stock option and warrant exercises. The
    current report, which was due to be filed in November 2005, was
    filed in February 2006.

 

    As a result of the issues described above, our management has
    concluded that, as of the end of periods covered by the
    restatements and as of December 31, 2005, our disclosure
    controls and procedures were not effective to enable us to
    record, process, summarize and report information required to be
    included in our SEC filings within the required time periods,
    and to ensure that such information is accumulated and reported
    to our management, including our chief executive officer and
    chief financial accounting officer, to allow timely decisions
    regarding required disclosure.

 

    As more fully described below under the caption
    “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
    Condition and Results of
    Operations — Restatement,” we have
    implemented a number of actions that we believe address the
    deficiencies in our financial reporting process and will improve
    our disclosure controls and procedures and our internal controls
    over financial reporting. However, we cannot yet assert that the
    remediation is or will be effective as we have not yet had
    sufficient time to test the newly implemented actions. We are in
    the process of documenting and testing our internal control
    procedures in order to satisfy the requirements of
    Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which requires
    annual management assessments of the effectiveness of our
    internal controls over financial reporting and a report by our
    independent auditors addressing these assessments. We have also
    retained the services of an independent consultant to assist us
    with the documenting and testing process. During the course of
    our testing we may identify deficiencies
    and/or one
    or more material weaknesses in our internal controls over
    financial reporting, which we may not be able to remediate in
    time to meet the deadline imposed by SEC rules under the
    Sarbanes-Oxley Act for compliance with the requirements of
    Section 404. In addition, if we fail to achieve and
    maintain the adequacy of our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls, as such standards are modified, supplemented
    or amended from time to time, we may not be able to conclude
    that we have effective disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or
    effective internal controls over financial reporting in
    accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. If
    we are not successful in improving our financial reporting
    process, our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls over financial reporting or if we identify
    deficiencies
    and/or one
    or more material weaknesses in our internal controls over
    financial reporting, our independent registered public
    accounting firm may be unable to attest that our
    management’s assessment of our internal controls over
    financial reporting is fairly stated, or they may be unable to
    express an opinion on our management’s evaluation of, or on
    the effectiveness of, our internal controls. If it is determined
    that our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls over financial reporting are not effective, we
    may not be able to provide reliable financial and other reports
    or prevent fraud, which, in turn, could harm our business and
    operating results, cause investors to lose confidence in the
    accuracy and completeness of our financial reports
    and/or
    adversely affect our ability to timely file our periodic reports
    with the SEC. Any failure to timely file our periodic reports
    with the SEC may give rise to a default under the indenture
    governing our senior notes and, ultimately, an acceleration of
    amounts due under the senior notes. In addition, a default under
    the indenture generally will also give rise to a default under
    our new credit agreement and could cause the acceleration of
    amounts due under the new credit agreement. If an acceleration
    of our senior notes or our other debt were to occur, we cannot
    assure you that we would have sufficient funds to repay such
    obligations.

 







  


The
    loss of key executives would adversely affect our ability to
    effectively finance and manage our business, acquire new
    businesses, and obtain and retain customers.



 

    We are dependent upon the efforts and skills of our executives
    to finance and manage our business, identify and consummate
    additional acquisitions and obtain and retain customers. These
    executives include:

 







 
    • 


    Chief Executive Officer and Chairman Munawar H.
    Hidayatallah; and


 

 
    • 


    President and Chief Operating Officer David Wilde.





    40



Table of Contents

 

    In addition, our development and expansion will require
    additional experienced management and operations personnel. No
    assurance can be given that we will be able to identify and
    retain these employees. The loss of the services of one or more
    of our key executives could increase our exposure to the other
    risks described in this “Risk Factors” section. We do
    not maintain key man insurance on any of our personnel.

 

Historically,
    we have been dependent on a few customers operating in a single
    industry, the loss of one or more could adversely affect our
    financial condition and results of operations.

 

    Our customers are engaged in the oil and natural gas drilling
    business in the United States, Mexico and elsewhere.
    Historically, we have been dependent upon a few customers for a
    significant portion of our revenue. In 2004, Matyep and
    Burlington Resources represented 10.8% and 10.1% respectively,
    of our revenues. In 2003, Matyep, Burlington Resources and
    El Paso Corporation represented 10.2%, 11.1% and 14.1%,
    respectively, of our revenues. This concentration of customers
    may increase our overall exposure to credit risk, and customers
    will likely be similarly affected by changes in economic and
    industry conditions. Our financial condition and results of
    operations will be materially adversely affected if one or more
    of our significant customers fails to pay us or ceases to
    contract with us for our services on terms that are favorable to
    us or at all.

 

Our
    international operations may expose us to political and other
    uncertainties, including risks of:

 







 
    • 


    terrorist acts, war and civil disturbances;


 

 
    • 


    changes in laws or policies regarding the award of
    contracts; and


 

 
    • 


    the inability to collect or repatriate income or capital.



 

    Part of our strategy is to prudently and opportunistically
    acquire businesses and assets that complement our existing
    products and services, and to expand our geographic footprint.
    If we make acquisitions in other countries, we may increase our
    exposure to the risks discussed above.

 

Environmental
    liabilities could result in substantial losses.

 

    Since our reorganization under the U.S. federal bankruptcy
    laws in 1988, a number of parties, including the Environmental
    Protection Agency, have asserted that we are responsible for the
    cleanup of hazardous waste sites with respect to our
    pre-bankruptcy activities. We believe that such claims are
    barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and we have not experienced
    any material expense in relation to any such claims. However, if
    we do not prevail with respect to these claims in the future, or
    if additional environmental claims are asserted against us
    relating to our current or future activities in the oil and
    natural gas industry, we could become subject to material
    environmental liabilities which could have a material adverse
    effect on our financial condition and results of operation.

 

Products
    liability claims relating to discontinued operations could
    result in substantial losses.

 

    Since our reorganization under the U.S. federal bankruptcy
    laws in 1988, we have been regularly named in products liability
    lawsuits primarily resulting from the manufacture of products
    containing asbestos. In connection with our bankruptcy, a
    special products liability trust was established to address
    products liability claims. We believe that claims against us are
    barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and that the products
    liability trust will continue to be responsible for products
    liability claims. Since 1988, no court has ruled that we are
    responsible for products liability claims. However, if we are
    held responsible for product liability claims, we could suffer
    substantial losses which could have a material adverse effect on
    our financial condition and results of operation. We have not
    manufactured products containing asbestos since our
    reorganization in 1988.



    41



Table of Contents


We may
    be subject to claims for personal injury and property damage,
    which could materially adversely affect our financial condition
    and results of operations.

 

    Our products and services are used for the exploration and
    production of oil and natural gas. These operations are subject
    to inherent hazards that can cause personal injury or loss of
    life, damage to or destruction of property, equipment, the
    environment and marine life, and suspension of operations.
    Litigation arising from an accident at a location where our
    products or services are used or provided may cause us to be
    named as a defendant in lawsuits asserting potentially large
    claims. We maintain customary insurance to protect our business
    against these potential losses. Our insurance has deductibles or
    self-insured retentions and contains certain coverage
    exclusions. However, we could become subject to material
    uninsured liabilities which could have a material adverse effect
    on our financial condition and results of operation.

 

Risks
    Associated with Our Industry

 

Cyclical
    declines in oil and natural gas prices may result in reduced use
    of our services, affecting our business, financial condition and
    results of operation and our ability to meet our capital
    expenditure obligations and financial commitments.

 

    The oil and natural gas exploration and drilling business is
    highly cyclical. Generally, as oil and natural gas prices
    decrease, exploration and drilling activity declines as
    marginally profitable projects become uneconomic and are either
    delayed or eliminated. Declines in the number of operating
    drilling rigs result in reduced use of and prices for our
    services. Accordingly, when oil and natural gas prices are
    relatively low, our revenues and income will suffer. Oil and
    natural gas prices depend on many factors beyond our control,
    including the following:

 







 
    • 


    economic conditions in the United States and elsewhere;


 

 
    • 


    changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production of the Organization of Petroleum
    Exporting Countries, commonly called OPEC;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production of non-OPEC countries;


 

 
    • 


    the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other
    oil and natural gas producing activities;


 

 
    • 


    the level of global oil and natural gas inventories; and


 

 
    • 


    advances in exploration, development and production technologies.



 

    Depending on the market prices of oil and natural gas, companies
    exploring for oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their
    drilling programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling
    services. Our contracts are generally short-term, and oil and
    natural gas companies tend to respond quickly to upward or
    downward changes in prices. Any reduction in the demand for
    drilling services may materially erode both pricing and
    utilization rates for our services and adversely affect our
    financial results. As a result, we may suffer losses, be unable
    to make necessary capital expenditures and be unable to meet our
    financial obligations.

 

Our
    industry is highly competitive, with intense price
    competition.

 

    The markets in which we operate are highly competitive.
    Contracts are traditionally awarded on a competitive bid basis.
    Pricing is often the primary factor in determining which
    qualified contractor is awarded a job. The competitive
    environment has intensified as recent mergers among oil and
    natural gas companies have reduced the number of available
    customers. Many other oilfield services companies are larger
    than us and have greater resources than we have. These
    competitors are better able to withstand industry downturns,
    compete on the basis of price and acquire new equipment and
    technologies, all of which could affect our revenues and
    profitability. These competitors compete with us both for
    customers and for acquisitions of other businesses. This
    competition may cause our business to suffer. We believe that
    competition for contracts will continue to be intense in the
    foreseeable future.



    42



Table of Contents


We may
    experience increased labor costs or the unavailability of
    skilled workers and the failure to retain key personnel could
    hurt our operations.

 

    Companies in our industry, including us, are dependent upon the
    available labor pool of skilled employees. We compete with other
    oilfield services businesses and other employers to attract and
    retain qualified personnel with the technical skills and
    experience required to provide our customers with the highest
    quality service. We are also subject to the Fair Labor Standards
    Act, which governs such matters as minimum wage, overtime and
    other working conditions. A shortage in the labor pool of
    skilled workers or other general inflationary pressures or
    changes in applicable laws and regulations could make it more
    difficult for us to attract and retain personnel and could
    require us to enhance our wage and benefits packages. There can
    be no assurance that labor costs will not increase. Any increase
    in our operating costs could cause our business to suffer.

 

Severe
    weather could have a material adverse impact on our
    business.

 

    Our business could be materially and adversely affected by
    severe weather. Repercussions of severe weather conditions may
    include:

 







 
    • 


    curtailment of services;


 

 
    • 


    weather-related damage to facilities and equipment resulting in
    suspension of operations;


 

 
    • 


    inability to deliver materials to job sites in accordance with
    contract schedules; and


 

 
    • 


    loss of productivity.



 

    In addition, oil and natural gas operations of our customers
    located offshore and onshore in the Gulf of Mexico and in Mexico
    may be adversely affected by hurricanes and tropical storms,
    resulting in reduced demand for our services. Further, our
    customers’ operations in the Mid-Continent and Rocky
    Mountain regions of the United States are also adversely
    affected by seasonal weather conditions. This limits our access
    to these job sites and our ability to service wells in these
    areas. These constraints decrease drilling activity and the
    resulting shortages or high costs could delay our operations and
    materially increase our operating and capital costs.

 

Our
    business may be affected by terrorist activity and by security
    measures taken in response to terrorism.

 

    We may experience loss of business or delays or defaults in
    payments from payers that have been affected by actual or
    potential terrorist activities. Some oil and natural gas
    drilling companies have implemented security measures in
    response to potential terrorist activities, including access
    restrictions, that could adversely affect our ability to market
    our services to new and existing customers and could increase
    our costs. Terrorist activities and potential terrorist
    activities and any resulting economic downturn could adversely
    impact our results of operations, impair our ability to raise
    capital or otherwise adversely affect our ability to grow our
    business.

 

We are
    subject to government regulations.

 

    We are subject to various federal, state and local laws and
    regulations relating to the energy industry in general and the
    environment in particular. Environmental laws have in recent
    years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose
    greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible
    parties. Although we are not aware of any proposed material
    changes in any federal, state and local statutes, rules or
    regulations, any changes could materially affect our financial
    condition and results of operations.



    43



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 7A.  


QUANTITATIVE
    AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK.




 

    We are exposed to market risk primarily from changes in interest
    rates and foreign currency exchange risks.

 

Interest
    Rate Risk

 

    Fluctuations in the general level of interest rates on our
    current and future fixed and variable rate debt obligations
    expose us to market risk. We are vulnerable to significant
    fluctuations in interest rates on our variable rate debt and on
    any future repricing or refinancing of our fixed rate debt and
    on future debt.

 

    At December 31, 2005, we were exposed to interest rate
    fluctuations on approximately $49.0 million of notes
    payable and bank credit facility borrowings carrying variable
    interest rates. A hypothetical one hundred basis point increase
    in interest rates for these notes payable would increase our
    annual interest expense by approximately $490,000. Due to the
    uncertainty of fluctuations in interest rates and the specific
    actions that might be taken by us to mitigate the impact of such
    fluctuations and their possible effects, the foregoing
    sensitivity analysis assumes no changes in our financial
    structure.

 

    We have also been subject to interest rate market risk for
    short-term invested cash and cash equivalents. The principal of
    such invested funds would not be subject to fluctuating value
    because of their highly liquid short-term nature. As of
    December 31, 2005, we had $1.1 million invested in
    short-term maturing investments.

 

Foreign
    Currency Exchange Rate Risk

 

    We conduct business in Mexico through our Mexican partner,
    Matyep. This business exposes us to foreign exchange risk. To
    control this risk, we provide for payment in U.S. dollars.
    However, we have historically provided our partner a discount
    upon payment equal to 50% of any loss suffered by our partner as
    a result of devaluation of the Mexican peso between the date of
    invoicing and the date of payment. During 2005 and 2004 the
    discounts have not exceeded $10,000 per year.



    44



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 8.  


FINANCIAL
    STATEMENTS.




 

REPORT OF
    INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM

 

    To the Board of Directors and Stockholders


    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


    Houston, Texas

 

    We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and subsidiaries as of
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, and the related consolidated
    statements of operations, stockholders’ equity and cash
    flows for the years then ended. These consolidated financial
    statements are the responsibility of the Company’s
    management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
    consolidated financial statements based on our audits.

 

    We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
    standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
    reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
    free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
    test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
    the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
    accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
    management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
    statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
    reasonable basis for our opinion.

 

    In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred
    to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
    consolidated financial position of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.
    and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, and the
    consolidated results of their operations and their cash flows
    for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting
    principles generally accepted in the United States of America.

 

    /s/  UHY Mann Frankfort Stein & Lipp CPAs, LLP

 

    Houston, Texas


    March 21, 2006



    45



Table of Contents


REPORT OF
    INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM

 

    To the Board of Directors


    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


    Houston, Texas

 

    We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of
    operations, stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the
    year ended December 31, 2003 of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.
    These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility
    of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to
    express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements
    based on our audit.

 

    We conducted our audit in accordance with the Standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
    standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
    reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
    free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
    test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
    the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
    accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
    management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
    statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a
    reasonable basis for our opinion.

 

    In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred
    to above present fairly, in all material respects, the results
    of its consolidated operations and cash flows for the year ended
    December 31, 2003 of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., in
    conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
    United States of America.

 

    As discussed in Note-2 to the consolidated financial statements,
    the Company restated the consolidated financial statements as of
    and for the year ended December 31, 2003.

 

    /s/  GORDON, HUGHES & BANKS, LLP


 

    Greenwood Village, Colorado


    March 3, 2004, except as to Note 11 which date is


    June 10, 2004 and Notes 2 and 17 which date is
    February 10, 2005 and


    Note 2 which date is August 5, 2005.



    46



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    BALANCE SHEETS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


(In thousands, except for share
    amounts)


 



 





ASSETS






Cash and cash equivalents
    



 


    $


    1,920


 


 


    $


    7,344


 





Trade receivables, net of
    allowance for doubtful accounts of $383 and $265 at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively
    



 


 


    26,964


 


 


 


    12,986


 





Inventory
    



 


 


    5,945


 


 


 


    2,373


 





Lease receivable, current
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    180


 





Prepaid expenses and other
    



 


 


    823


 


 


 


    1,495


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current assets
    



 


 


    35,652


 


 


 


    24,378


 





Property and equipment, at costs
    net of accumulated depreciation of $9,996 and $5,251 at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively
    



 


 


    80,574


 


 


 


    37,679


 





Goodwill
    



 


 


    12,417


 


 


 


    11,776


 





Other intangible assets, net of
    accumulated amortization of $3,163 and $2,036 at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively
    



 


 


    6,783


 


 


 


    5,057


 





Debt issuance costs, net of
    accumulated amortization of $299 and $828 at December 31,
    2005 and 2004, respectively
    



 


 


    1,298


 


 


 


    685


 





Lease receivable, less current
    portion
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    558


 





Other assets
    



 


 


    631


 


 


 


    59


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total assets
    



 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 





LIABILITIES AND
    STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY






Current maturities of long-term
    debt
    



 


    $


    5,632


 


 


    $


    5,541


 





Trade accounts payable
    



 


 


    9,018


 


 


 


    5,694


 





Accrued salaries, benefits and
    payroll taxes
    



 


 


    1,271


 


 


 


    615


 





Accrued interest
    



 


 


    289


 


 


 


    470


 





Accrued expenses
    



 


 


    4,350


 


 


 


    1,852


 





Accounts payable, related parties
    



 


 


    60


 


 


 


    740


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current liabilities
    



 


 


    20,620


 


 


 


    14,912


 





Accrued postretirement benefit
    obligations
    



 


 


    335


 


 


 


    687


 





Long-term debt, net of current
    maturities
    



 


 


    54,937


 


 


 


    24,932


 





Other long-term liabilities
    



 


 


    588


 


 


 


    129


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities
    



 


 


    76,480


 


 


 


    40,660


 





Commitments and Contingencies
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Minority interest
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,423


 





Stockholders’
    Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Preferred stock, $0.01 par
    value (25,000,000 shares authorized, none issued)
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Common stock, $0.01 par value
    (100,000,000 shares authorized;16,859,988 issued and
    outstanding at December 31, 2005 and 20,000,000 shares
    authorized and 13,611,525 issued and outstanding at
    December 31, 2004)
    



 


 


    169


 


 


 


    136


 





Capital in excess of par value
    



 


 


    58,889


 


 


 


    40,331


 





Retained earnings (deficit)
    



 


 


    1,817


 


 


 


    (5,358


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total stockholders’ equity
    



 


 


    60,875


 


 


 


    35,109


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities and
    stockholders’ equity
    



 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.

 


    47



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 


 


(Restated)


 




 


 


(In thousands, except per



 




 


 


share amounts)


 



 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    32,724


 





Cost of revenues
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Direct costs
    



 


 


    69,889


 


 


 


    32,598


 


 


 


    21,977


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    4,874


 


 


 


    2,702


 


 


 


    2,052


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Gross margin
    



 


 


    30,581


 


 


 


    12,426


 


 


 


    8,695


 





General and administrative expense
    



 


 


    15,928


 


 


 


    7,135


 


 


 


    5,285


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    1,787


 


 


 


    876


 


 


 


    884


 





Post-retirement medical costs
    



 


 


    (352


    )


 


 


    188


 


 


 


    (99


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income from operations
    



 


 


    13,218


 


 


 


    4,227


 


 


 


    2,625


 





Other income (expense):
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Interest expense
    



 


 


    (4,397


    )


 


 


    (2,808


    )


 


 


    (2,467


    )





Settlement on lawsuit
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,034


 





Gain on sale of interest in AirComp
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,433


 





Other
    



 


 


    186


 


 


 


    304


 


 


 


    15


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total other income (expense)
    



 


 


    (4,211


    )


 


 


    (2,504


    )


 


 


    1,015


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income before minority interest
    and income taxes
    



 


 


    9,007


 


 


 


    1,723


 


 


 


    3,640


 





Minority interest in income of
    subsidiaries
    



 


 


    (488


    )


 


 


    (321


    )


 


 


    (343


    )





Provision for income taxes
    



 


 


    (1,344


    )


 


 


    (514


    )


 


 


    (370


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


 


    7,175


 


 


 


    888


 


 


 


    2,927


 





Preferred stock dividend
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (124


    )


 


 


    (656


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income attributed to common
    stockholders
    



 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 


 


    $


    2,271


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common
    share — basic
    



 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.58


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.50


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 


 


 


    3,927


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 


 


 


    5,850


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.

 


    48



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Capital in



 


 


Retained



 


 


 


 




 


 


Common Stock


 


 


Excess of



 


 


Earnings



 


 


 


 




 


 


Shares


 


 


Amount


 


 


Par Value


 


 


(Deficit)


 


 


Total


 




 


 


(In thousands, except share
    amounts)


 



 





Balances, December 31, 2002
    



 


 


    3,926,668


 


 


    $


    39


 


 


    $


    10,143


 


 


    $


    (9,173


    )


 


    $


    1,009


 





Net income (restated)
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,927


 


 


 


    2,927


 





Effect of consolidation of AirComp
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    955


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    955


 





Accrual of preferred dividends
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (350


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (350


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Balances, December 31, 2003,
    as restated
    



 


 


    3,926,668


 


 


 


    39


 


 


 


    10,748


 


 


 


    (6,246


    )


 


 


    4,541


 





Net income
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    888


 


 


 


    888


 





Issuance of common stock:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions
    



 


 


    1,868,466


 


 


 


    19


 


 


 


    8,592


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,611


 





Private placement
    



 


 


    6,081,301


 


 


 


    61


 


 


 


    15,600


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,661


 





Services
    



 


 


    17,000


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    99


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    99


 





Conversion of preferred stock
    



 


 


    1,718,090


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    4,278


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,295


 





Issuance of stock purchase warrants
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,138


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,138


 





Accrual of preferred dividends
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (124


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (124


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Balances, December 31, 2004
    



 


 


    13,611,525


 


 


 


    136


 


 


 


    40,331


 


 


 


    (5,358


    )


 


 


    35,109


 





Net income
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    7,175


 


 


 


    7,175


 





Issuance of common stock:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions
    



 


 


    411,275


 


 


 


    4


 


 


 


    1,746


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,750


 





Secondary public offering
    



 


 


    1,761,034


 


 


 


    18


 


 


 


    15,441


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,459


 





Stock options and warrants
    exercised
    



 


 


    1,076,154


 


 


 


    11


 


 


 


    1,371


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,382


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Balances, December 31, 2005
    



 


 


    16,859,988


 


 


    $


    169


 


 


    $


    58,889


 


 


    $


    1,817


 


 


    $


    60,875


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    49



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Cash Flows from Operating
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 


 


    $


    2,927


 





Adjustments to reconcile net
    income to net cash provided by operating activities:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    4,874


 


 


 


    2,702


 


 


 


    2,052


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    1,787


 


 


 


    876


 


 


 


    884


 





Write-off of deferred financing
    fees due to refinancing
    



 


 


    653


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Issuance of stock options for
    services
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    14


 


 


 


    —


 





Amortization of discount on debt
    



 


 


    9


 


 


 


    350


 


 


 


    516


 





(Gain) on change in PBO liability
    



 


 


    (352


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (125


    )





(Gain) on settlement of lawsuit
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (1,034


    )





(Gain) on sale of interest in
    AirComp
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,433


    )





Minority interest in income of
    subsidiaries
    



 


 


    488


 


 


 


    321


 


 


 


    343


 





(Gain) loss on sale of property
    



 


 


    (669


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    82


 





Changes in working capital:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





(Increase) in accounts receivable
    



 


 


    (10,437


    )


 


 


    (2,292


    )


 


 


    (4,414


    )





(Increase) in due from related
    party
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (7


    )


 


 


    —


 





(Increase) in other current assets
    



 


 


    (2,143


    )


 


 


    (612


    )


 


 


    (1,260


    )





Decrease (increase) in other assets
    



 


 


    (936


    )


 


 


    (19


    )


 


 


    1


 





Decrease in lease deposit
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    525


 





Increase in accounts payable
    



 


 


    2,373


 


 


 


    1,140


 


 


 


    2,251


 





(Decrease) increase in accrued
    interest
    



 


 


    324


 


 


 


    299


 


 


 


    (126


    )





(Decrease) increase in accrued
    expenses
    



 


 


    (97


    )


 


 


    (276


    )


 


 


    397


 





(Decrease) increase in other
    long-term liabilities
    



 


 


    86


 


 


 


    (141


    )


 


 


    —


 





Increase in accrued
    salaries,benefits and payroll taxes
    



 


 


    443


 


 


 


    19


 


 


 


    1,293


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided by operating
    activities
    



 


 


    3,578


 


 


 


    3,262


 


 


 


    1,879


 





Cash Flows from Investing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
    



 


 


    (36,888


    )


 


 


    (4,459


    )


 


 


    —


 





Purchase of property and equipment
    



 


 


    (17,767


    )


 


 


    (4,603


    )


 


 


    (5,354


    )





Proceeds from sale of property and
    equipment
    



 


 


    1,579


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    843


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash used in investing
    activities
    



 


 


    (53,076


    )


 


 


    (9,062


    )


 


 


    (4,511


    )





Cash Flows from Financing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Proceeds from issuance of
    long-term debt
    



 


 


    56,251


 


 


 


    8,169


 


 


 


    14,127


 





Payments on long-term debt
    



 


 


    (28,202


    )


 


 


    (13,259


    )


 


 


    (10,826


    )





Payments on related party debt
    



 


 


    (1,522


    )


 


 


    (246


    )


 


 


    (246


    )





Net borrowings on lines of credit
    



 


 


    2,527


 


 


 


    689


 


 


 


    1,138


 





Proceeds from issuance of common
    stock
    



 


 


    15,459


 


 


 


    16,883


 


 


 


    —


 





Proceeds from exercise of options
    and warrants
    



 


 


    1,382


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Debt issuance costs
    



 


 


    (1,821


    )


 


 


    (391


    )


 


 


    (408


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided by financing
    activities
    



 


 


    44,074


 


 


 


    11,845


 


 


 


    3,785


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net increase (decrease) in cash
    and cash equivalents
    



 


 


(5,424


    )


 


 


    6,045


 


 


 


    1,153


 





Cash and cash equivalents at
    beginning of year
    



 


 


    7,344


 


 


 


    1,299


 


 


 


    146


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash and cash equivalents at end
    of year
    



 


    $


    1,920


 


 


    $


    7,344


 


 


    $


    1,299


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    50



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial Statements

 







NOTE 1 — 


NATURE OF
    BUSINESS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING
    POLICIES



 

Organization
    of Business

 

    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. (“Allis-Chalmers” or
    “We”) was incorporated in Delaware in 1913. OilQuip
    Rentals, Inc. (“OilQuip”), an oil and gas rental
    company, was incorporated on February 4, 2000 to find and
    acquire acquisition targets to operate as subsidiaries.

 

    On February 6, 2001, OilQuip, through its subsidiary,
    Mountain Compressed Air Inc. (“Mountain Air”), a Texas
    corporation, acquired certain assets of Mountain Air Drilling
    Service Co., Inc, whose business consisted of providing
    equipment and trained personnel in the Four Corners area of the
    southwestern United States. Mountain Air primarily provided
    compressed air equipment and related products and services and
    trained operators to companies in the business of drilling for
    natural gas. On May 9, 2001, OilQuip merged into a
    subsidiary of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. In the merger, all of
    OilQuip’s outstanding common stock was converted into
    2.0 million shares of Allis-Chalmers’ common stock.
    For legal purposes, Allis-Chalmers acquired OilQuip, the parent
    company of Mountain Air. However, for accounting purposes,
    OilQuip was treated as the acquiring company in a reverse
    acquisition of Allis-Chalmers.

 

    On February 6, 2002, we acquired 81% of the outstanding
    stock of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services Inc.
    (“Tubular”), formerly known as Jens’ Oilfield
    Service, Inc., which supplies highly specialized equipment and
    operations to install casing and production tubing required to
    drill and complete oil and gas wells. On February 2, 2002,
    we also purchased substantially all of the outstanding common
    stock and preferred stock of Strata Directional Technology, Inc.
    (“Strata”), which provides high-end directional and
    horizontal drilling services for specific targeted reservoirs
    that cannot be reached vertically.

 

    In July 2003, through its subsidiary Mountain Air, we entered
    into a limited liability company operating agreement with a
    division of M-I L.L.C. (“M-I”), a joint venture
    between Smith International and Schlumberger N.V. (Schlumberger
    Limited), to form a Texas limited liability company named
    AirComp LLC (“AirComp”). The assets contributed by
    Mountain Air were recorded at Mountain Air’s historical
    cost of $6.3 million, and the assets contributed by M-I
    were recorded at fair market value of $10.3 million. We
    originally owned 55% and M-I originally owned 45% of AirComp. As
    a result of our controlling interest and operating control, we
    consolidated AirComp in our financial statements. AirComp is in
    the compressed air drilling services segment.

 

    On September 23, 2004, we acquired 100% of the outstanding
    stock of Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc. (“Safco”) for
    $1.0 million. Safco leases spiral drill pipe and provides
    related oilfield services to the oil drilling industry.

 

    On September 30, 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of
    Tubular’ in exchange for 1.3 million shares of our
    common stock. The total value of the consideration paid to the
    seller, Jens Mortensen, was $6.4 million which was equal to
    the number of shares of common stock issued to
    Mr. Mortensen multiplied by the last sale price ($4.95) of
    the common stock as reported on the American Stock Exchange on
    the date of issuance.

 

    On November 10, 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all
    the assets of Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc. and Marquis
    Bit Co., L.L.C. collectively (“Diamond Air”) for
    $4.6 million in cash and the assumption of approximately
    $450,000 of accrued liabilities. We contributed
    $2.5 million and M-I L.L.C. contributed $2.1 million
    to AirComp LLC in order to fund the purchase. Diamond Air
    provides air drilling technology and products to the oil and gas
    industry in West Texas, New Mexico and Oklahoma. Diamond Air is
    a leading provider of air hammers and hammer bit products.

 

    On December 10, 2004, we acquired Downhole Injection
    Services, LLC (“Downhole”) for approximately
    $1.1 million in cash, 568,466 shares of common stock
    and payment or assumption of $950,000 of debt. Downhole is
    headquartered in Midland, Texas, and provides chemical
    treatments to wells by inserting small diameter, stainless steel
    coiled tubing into producing oil and gas wells.



    51



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    On April 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock
    of Delta Rental Service, Inc. (“Delta”) for
    $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of our common
    stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000. Delta, located
    in Lafayette, Louisiana, is a rental tool company providing
    specialty rental items to the oil and gas industry such as
    spiral heavy weight drill pipe, test plugs used to test blow-out
    preventors, well head retrieval tools, spacer spools and
    assorted handling tools.

 

    On May 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital
    stock of Capcoil Tubing Services, Inc. (“Capcoil”) for
    $2.7 million in cash, 168,161 shares of our common
    stock and the payment or assumption of approximately
    $1.3 million of debt. Capcoil, located in Kilgore, Texas,
    is engaged in downhole well servicing by providing coil tubing
    services to enhance production from existing wells.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T. Enterprises, Inc. (“W.T.”), based in
    South Texas, for $6.0 million in cash. The equipment
    includes compressors, boosters, mist pumps and vehicles.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I its 45% interest in
    AirComp and subordinated note in the principal amount of
    $4.8 million issued by AirComp, for which we paid M-I
    $7.1 million in cash and issued to M-I a $4.0 million
    subordinated note bearing interest at 5% per annum. As a
    result, we now own 100% of AirComp.

 

    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding capital stock of Target Energy Inc.
    (“Target”) for $1.3 million in cash and
    forgiveness of a lease receivable of approximately
    $0.6 million. The results of Target are included in our
    directional and horizontal drilling segment as their Measure
    While Drilling equipment is utilized in that segment.

 

    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for approximately
    $15.6 million. These assets are located in Corpus Christi,
    Texas; Kilgore, Texas; Lafayette, Louisiana and Houma, Louisiana.

 

Vulnerabilities
    and Concentrations

 

    We provide oilfield services in several regions, including the
    states of Texas, Utah, Louisiana, Colorado, Oklahoma, and New
    Mexico, the Gulf of Mexico and southern portions of Mexico. The
    nature of our operations and the many regions in which we
    operate subject us to changing economic, regulatory and
    political conditions. We are vulnerable to near-term and
    long-term changes in the demand for and prices of oil and
    natural gas and the related demand for oilfield service
    operations.

 

Use
    of Estimates

 

    The preparation of financial statements in conformity with
    accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
    America requires management to make estimates and assumptions
    that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
    disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
    the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues
    and expenses during the reporting period. Future events and
    their effects cannot be perceived with certainty. Accordingly,
    our accounting estimates require the exercise of judgment. While
    management believes that the estimates and assumptions used in
    the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are
    appropriate, actual results could differ from those estimates.
    Estimates are used for, but are not limited to, determining the
    following: allowance for doubtful accounts, recoverability of
    long-lived assets and intangibles, useful lives used in
    depreciation and amortization, income taxes and valuation
    allowances. The accounting estimates used in the preparation of
    the consolidated financial statements



    52



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    may change as new events occur, as more experience is acquired,
    as additional information is obtained and as our operating
    environment changes.

 

Principles
    of Consolidation

 

    The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
    Allis-Chalmers and its subsidiaries. Our subsidiaries at
    December 31, 2005 are Oil Quip, Mountain Air, Tubular,
    Strata, AirComp, Safco, Downhole, Delta, Capcoil and Target. All
    significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated.

 

Revenue
    Recognition

 

    We provide rental equipment and drilling services to our
    customers at per day and per job contractual rates and recognize
    the drilling related revenue as the work progresses and when
    collectibility is reasonably assured. The Securities and
    Exchange Commission’s (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB)
    No. 104, Revenue Recognition In Financial Statements
    (“SAB No. 104”), provides guidance on
    the SEC staff’s views on the application of generally
    accepted accounting principles to selected revenue recognition
    issues. Our revenue recognition policy is in accordance with
    generally accepted accounting principles and
    SAB No. 104.

 

Allowance
    for Doubtful Accounts

 

    Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal
    trade terms. We sell our services to oil and natural gas
    exploration and production companies. We perform continuing
    credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition
    and although we generally does not require collateral, letters
    of credit may be required from customers in certain
    circumstances.

 

    We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on
    specifically identified amounts that are determined
    uncollectible. We have a limited number of customers with
    individually large amounts due at any given date. Any
    unanticipated change in any one of these customer’s credit
    worthiness or other matters affecting the collectibility of
    amounts due from such customers could have a material effect on
    the results of operations in the period in which such changes or
    events occur. After all attempts to collect a receivable have
    failed, the receivable is written off against the allowance. As
    of December 31, 2005 and 2004, we had recorded an allowance
    for doubtful accounts of $383,000 and $265,000 respectively. Bad
    debt expense was $219,000, $104,000 and $136,000 for the years
    ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.

 

Cash
    Equivalents

 

    We consider all highly liquid investments with an original
    maturity of three months or less at the time of purchase to be
    cash equivalents.

 

Inventories

 

    Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is
    determined using the first — in,
    first — out (“FIFO”) method or the
    average cost method, which approximates FIFO, and includes the
    cost of materials, labor and manufacturing overhead.

 

Property
    and Equipment

 

    Property and equipment is recorded at cost less accumulated
    depreciation. Certain equipment held under capital leases are
    classified as equipment and the related obligations are recorded
    as liabilities.

 

    Maintenance and repairs, which do not improve or extend the life
    of the related assets, are charged to operations when incurred.
    Refurbishments and renewals are capitalized when the value of
    the equipment is enhanced for an extended period. When property
    and equipment are sold or otherwise disposed of, the asset



    53



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    account and related accumulated depreciation account are
    relieved, and any gain or loss is included in operations.

 

    The cost of property and equipment currently in service is
    depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related
    assets, which range from three to twenty years. Depreciation is
    computed on the straight-line method for financial reporting
    purposes. Capital leases are amortized using the straight-line
    method over the estimated useful lives of the assets and lease
    amortization is included in depreciation expense. Depreciation
    expense charged to operations was $4.9 million,
    $2.7 million and $2.1 million for the years ended
    December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.

 

Goodwill,
    Intangible Assets and Amortization

 

    Goodwill, including goodwill associated with equity method
    investments, and other intangible assets with infinite lives are
    not amortized, but tested for impairment annually or more
    frequently if circumstances indicate that impairment may exist.
    Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized either
    on a straight-line basis over the asset’s estimated useful
    life or on a basis that reflects the pattern in which the
    economic benefits of the intangible assets are realized.

 

    We perform impairment tests on the carrying value of our
    goodwill on an annual basis as of December 31st for each of
    our reportable segments. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004,
    no evidence of impairment exists.

 







  


Impairment
    of Long-Lived Assets



 

    Long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment
    and other intangible assets, and certain other assets are
    reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
    circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be
    recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded in the period in
    which it is determined that the carrying amount is not
    recoverable. The determination of recoverability is made based
    upon the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, excluding
    interest expense. The impairment loss is determined by comparing
    the fair value, as determined by a discounted cash flow
    analysis, with the carrying value of the related assets.

 

Financial
    Instruments

 

    Financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents,
    accounts receivable and payable, and debt. The carrying value of
    cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable and payable
    approximate fair value due to their short-term nature. We
    believe the fair values and the carrying value of our debt would
    not be materially different due to the instruments’
    interest rates approximating market rates for similar borrowings
    at December 31, 2005 and 2004.

 

Concentration
    of Credit and Customer Risk

 

    Financial instruments that potentially subject us to
    concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash and
    cash equivalents and trade accounts receivable. We transact our
    business with several financial institutions. However, the
    amount on deposit in two financial institutions exceeded the
    $100,000 federally insured limit at December 31, 2005 by a
    total of $2.0 million. Management believes that the
    financial institutions are financially sound and the risk of
    loss is minimal.

 

    We sell our services to major and independent domestic and
    international oil and gas companies. We perform ongoing credit
    valuations of our customers and provide allowances for probable
    credit losses where appropriate. In 2005, none of our customers
    accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated revenues. In the
    year ended December 31, 2004, Matyep in Mexico represented
    10.8%, and Burlington Resources represented 10.1% of our
    consolidated revenues, respectively. In the year ended
    December 31, 2003, Matyep, Burlington



    54



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    Resources, Inc., and El Paso Energy Corporation represented
    10.2%, 11.1% and 14.1%, respectively, of our consolidated
    revenues. Revenues from Matyep represented 94.5%, 98.0% and 100%
    of our international revenues in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
    respectively.

 

Debt
    Issuance Costs

 

    The costs related to the issuance of debt are capitalized and
    amortized to interest expense using the straight-line method,
    which approximates the interest method, over the maturity
    periods of the related debt.

 

Income
    Taxes

 

    We use the liability method for determining our income taxes,
    under which current and deferred tax liabilities and assets are
    recorded in accordance with enacted tax laws and rates. Under
    this method, the amounts of deferred tax liabilities and assets
    at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate
    expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or
    recovered. Future tax benefits are recognized to the extent that
    realization of such benefits is more likely than not.

 

    Deferred income taxes are provided for the estimated income tax
    effect of temporary differences between financial and tax bases
    in assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets are also provided
    for certain tax credit carryforwards. A valuation allowance to
    reduce deferred tax assets is established when it is more likely
    than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets
    will not be realized.

 

Stock-Based
    Compensation

 

    We account for our stock-based compensation using Accounting
    Principle Board Opinion No. 25 (“APB
    No. 25”). Under APB No. 25, compensation expense
    is recognized for stock options with an exercise price that is
    less than the market price on the grant date of the option. For
    stock options with exercise prices at or above the market value
    of the stock on the grant date, we adopted the disclosure-only
    provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards
    (“SFAS”) No. 123, Accounting For Stock-Based
    Compensation (“SFAS 123”). We also adopted
    the disclosure-only provisions of SFAS No. 123 for the
    stock options granted to our employees and directors.
    Accordingly, no compensation cost has been recognized under APB
    No. 25. Had compensation expense for the options granted
    been recorded based on the fair value at the grant date for the
    options, consistent with the provisions of SFAS 123, our
    net income/(loss) and net income/(loss) per share for the years
    ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 would have been
    decreased to the pro forma amounts indicated below (in
    thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


For the Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Net income attributed to common
    stockholders as reported:
    



 


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 


 


    $


    2,271


 





Less total stock based employee
    compensation expense determined under fair value based method
    for all awards net of tax related effects
    



 


 


 


 


    (4,284


    )


 


 


    (1,072


    )


 


 


    (2,314


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Pro-forma net income (loss)
    attributed to common stockholders
    



 


 


 


    $


    2,891


 


 


    $


    (308


    )


 


    $


    (43


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income/(loss) per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


As reported
    


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.58


 




 


 


Pro forma
    


 


    $


    0.19


 


 


    $


    (0.04


    )


 


    $


    (0.01


    )





Diluted
    



 


As reported
    


 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.50


 




 


 


Pro forma
    


 


    $


    0.18


 


 


    $


    (0.04


    )


 


    $


    (0.01


    )







    55



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    Options were granted in 2005, 2004 and 2003. See Note 12
    for further disclosures regarding stock options. The following
    assumptions were applied in determining the pro forma
    compensation costs:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


For the Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Expected dividend yield
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Expected price volatility
    



 


 


    84.28%


 


 


 


    89.76%


 


 


 


    265.08%


 





Risk-free interest rate
    



 


 


    5.6%


 


 


 


    7.00%


 


 


 


    6.25%


 





Expected life of options
    



 


 


    7 years


 


 


 


    7 years


 


 


 


    7 years


 





Weighted average fair value of
    options
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





granted at market value
    



 


    $


    5.02


 


 


    $


    3.19


 


 


    $


    2.78


 





 

Segments
    of an Enterprise and Related Information

 

    We disclose the results of our segments in accordance with
    SFAS No. 131, Disclosures About Segments Of An
    Enterprise And Related Information
    (“SFAS No. 131”). We designate the
    internal organization that is used by management for allocating
    resources and assessing performance as the source of our
    reportable segments. SFAS No. 131 also requires
    disclosures about products and services, geographic areas and
    major customers Please see Note 18 for further disclosure
    of segment information in accordance with SFAS No. 131.

 

Pension
    and Other Post Retirement Benefits

 

    SFAS No. 132, Employer’s Disclosures About
    Pension And Other Post Retirement Benefits
    (“SFAS No. 132”), requires certain
    disclosures about employers’ pension and other post
    retirement benefit plans and specifies the accounting and
    measurement or recognition of those plans.
    SFAS No. 132 requires disclosure of information on
    changes in the benefit obligations and fair values of the plan
    assets that facilitates financial analysis. Please see
    Note 3 for further disclosure in accordance with
    SFAS No. 132.

 

Income
    Per Common Share

 

    We compute income per common share in accordance with the
    provisions of SFAS No. 128, Earnings Per Share
    (“SFAS No. 128”). SFAS No. 128
    requires companies with complex capital structures to present
    basic and diluted earnings per share. Basic earnings per share
    are computed on the basis of the weighted average number of
    shares of common stock outstanding during the period. For
    periods through April 12, 2004, preferred dividends are
    deducted from net income and have been considered in the
    calculation of income available to common stockholders in
    computing basic earnings per share. Diluted earnings per share
    is similar to basic earnings per share, but presents the
    dilutive effect on a per share basis of potential common shares
    (e.g., convertible preferred stock, stock options, etc.) as if
    they had been converted. Potential dilutive common shares that
    have an anti-dilutive effect (e.g., those that increase income
    per share) are excluded from diluted earnings per share.



    56



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    The components of basic and diluted earnings per share are as
    follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


For the Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Numerator:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income available for common
    stockholders
    



 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 


 


    $


    2,271


 





Plus income impact of assumed
    conversions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Preferred stock dividends/interest
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    124


 


 


 


    656


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income applicable to common
    stockholders plus assumed conversions
    



 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 


 


    $


    2,927


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Denominator:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Denominator for basic earnings per
    share — weighted average shares outstanding
    



 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 


 


 


    3,927


 





Effect of potentially dilutive
    common shares:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Convertible preferred stock and
    employee and director stock options
    



 


 


    1,406


 


 


 


    1,580


 


 


 


    1,923


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average shares
    outstanding and assumed conversions
    



 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 


 


 


    5,850


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic earnings per share
    



 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.58


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted earnings per share
    



 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.50


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Reclassification

 

    Certain prior period balances have been reclassified to conform
    to current year presentation.

 

New
    Accounting Pronouncements

 

    In May 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154,
    Accounting Changes and Error Corrections.
    SFAS No. 154 requires retroactive application of a
    voluntary change in accounting principle to prior period
    financial statements unless it is impracticable.
    SFAS No. 154 also requires that a change in the method
    of depreciation, amortization or depletion for long-lived,
    non-financial assets be accounted for as a change in accounting
    estimate that is affected by a change in accounting principle.
    SFAS No. 154 replaces APB Opinion No. 20,
    “Accounting Changes” and SFAS No. 3,
    “Reporting Accounting Changes in Interim Financial
    Statements”. SFAS No. 154 is effective for fiscal
    years beginning after December 15, 2005. We will adopt the
    provisions of SFAS No. 154 as of January 1, 2006
    and do not expect that its adoption will have a material impact
    on our results of operations or financial condition.

 

    In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123R,
    Share-Based Payment. SFAS No. 123R revises
    SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based
    Compensation, and focuses on accounting for share-based
    payments for services by employer to employee. The statement
    requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants
    of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial
    statements based on their fair values. We will adopt
    SFAS No. 123R as of January 1, 2006 and will use
    the modified prospective transition method, utilizing the
    Black-Scholes option pricing model for the calculation of the
    fair value of our employee stock options. Under the modified
    prospective method, stock option awards that are granted,
    modified or settled after January 1, 2006 will be measured
    and accounted for in accordance with SFAS No. 123R.
    Compensation cost for awards granted prior to, but not vested,
    as of January 1, 2006 would be based on the grant date
    attributes originally used to value those awards for pro forma
    purposes under



    57



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    SFAS No. 123. We believe that the adoption of this
    standard will result in an expense of approximately
    $3.2 million, or a reduction in diluted earnings per share
    of approximately $0.18 per share. This estimate assumes no
    additional grants of stock options beyond those outstanding as
    of December 31, 2005. This estimate is based on many
    assumptions including the level of stock option grants expected
    in 2006, our stock price, and significant assumptions in the
    option valuation model including volatility and the expected
    life of options. Actual expenses could differ from the estimate.

 

    In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151,
    Inventory Costs — an Amendment of ARB
    No. 43, Chapter 4, which amends the guidance in ARB
    No. 43 to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of
    idle facility expense, freight, handling costs and wasted
    material. SFAS No. 151 requires that these items be
    recognized as current period charges. In addition,
    SFAS No. 151 requires the allocation of fixed
    production overheads to inventory based on the normal capacity
    of the production facilities. We are required to adopt
    provisions of SFAS 151, on a prospective basis, as of
    January 1, 2006. We do not believe the adoption of
    SFAS 151 will have a material impact on our future results
    of operations.

 







NOTE 2 — 


RESTATEMENT



 

Earnings
    Per Share

 

    We understated diluted earnings per share due to an incorrect
    calculation of our weighted shares outstanding for the third
    quarter of 2003, for each of the first three quarters of 2004,
    for the years ended December 31, 2003 and 2004 and for the
    quarter ended March 31, 2005. In addition, we understated
    basic earnings per share due to an incorrect calculation of our
    weighted average basic shares outstanding for the quarter ended
    September 30, 2004. Consequently, we have restated our
    financial statements for each of those periods. The incorrect
    calculation resulted from a mathematical error and an improper
    application of SFAS No. 128. The effect of the
    restatement is to reduce weighted average basic and diluted
    shares outstanding for the three and nine months ended
    September 30, 2004. Consequently, weighted average basic
    and diluted earnings per share for the three and nine months
    ended September 30, 2004 were increased.

 

    A restated earnings per share calculation for all affected
    periods reflecting the above adjustments to our results as
    previously restated (see following section), is presented below
    (amounts in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended
    March 31, 2005


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.02


 


 


    $


    0.11


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    17,789


 


 


 


    (3,094


    )


 


 


    14,695


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Year Ended December 31,
    2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.07


 


 


    $


    0.02


 


 


    $


    0.09


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    11,959


 


 


 


    (2,449


    )


 


 


    9,510


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


    58



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended
    September 30, 2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common
    share — basic
    



 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    0.02


 


 


    $


    0.06


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    0.01


 


 


    $


    0.05


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    11,599


 


 


 


    (3,301


    )


 


 


    8,298


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    14,407


 


 


 


    (4,579


    )


 


 


    9,828


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended June 30,
    2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    0.01


 


 


    $


    0.05


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    10,237


 


 


 


    (2,618


    )


 


 


    7,619


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended
    March 31, 2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.05


 


 


    $


    0.03


 


 


    $


    0.08


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    5,762


 


 


 


    478


 


 


 


    6,240


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Year Ended December 31,
    2003


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.39


 


 


    $


    0.11


 


 


    $


    0.50


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    5,761


 


 


 


    89


 


 


 


    5,850


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended
    September 30, 2003


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common share- diluted
    



 


    $


    0.60


 


 


    $


    (0.01


    )


 


    $


    0.59


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    5,761


 


 


 


    208


 


 


 


    5,969


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

AirComp
    Acquisition

 

    In connection with the formation of AirComp LLC in 2003, we,
    along with M-I L.L.C. contributed assets to AirComp in exchange
    for a 55% interest and 45% interest, respectively, in AirComp.
    We originally


    59



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    accounted for the formation of AirComp as a joint venture.
    However in February 2005, we determined that the transaction
    should have been accounted for using purchase accounting
    pursuant to SFAS No. 141, Business Combinations
    and recorded the sale of an interest in a subsidiary, in
    accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 51,
    Accounting for Sales of Stock by a Subsidiary.
    Consequently, we restated our financial statements for the
    quarter ended September 30, 2003, for the year ended
    December 31, 2003 and for the three quarters ended
    September 30, 2004, to reflect the following adjustments:

 

Increase
    in Book Value of Fixed Assets.

 

    Under joint venture accounting, we originally recorded the value
    of the assets contributed by M-I to AirComp at M-I’s
    historical cost of $6.9 million. Under purchase accounting,
    we increased the recorded value of the assets contributed by M-I
    by approximately $3.3 million to $10.3 million to
    reflect their fair market value as determined by a third party
    appraisal. In addition, under joint venture accounting, we
    established negative goodwill which reduced fixed assets in the
    amount of $1.6 million. The negative goodwill was amortized
    by us over the lives of the related fixed assets. Under purchase
    accounting, we increased fixed assets by $1.6 million to
    reverse the negative goodwill previously recorded and reversed
    amortization expenses recorded in 2004. Therefore, the cost of
    fixed assets was increased by a total of $4.9 million at
    the time of acquisition. As a result of the increase in fixed
    assets and the reversal of amortization of negative goodwill,
    depreciation expense increased by $98,000 for the year ended
    December 31, 2003.

 

Increase
    in Minority Interest and Capital in Excess of Par
    Value.

 

    Under purchase accounting, minority interest was increased by
    $1.5 million, which was partially offset by minority
    interest expense of $44,000 for the year ended December 31,
    2003. Under purchase accounting, the capital in excess of par
    was increased by $955,000.



    60



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    A restated consolidated balance sheet, reflecting the above
    adjustments follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


At December 31,
    2003


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


Restatement



 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Assets



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash and cash equivalents
    



 


    $


    1,299


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    1,299


 





Trade receivables, net
    



 


 


    8,823


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,823


 





Lease receivable, current
    



 


 


    180


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    180


 





Prepaid expenses and other
    



 


 


    887


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    887


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current assets
    



 


 


    11,189


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    11,189


 





Property and equipment, net
    



 


 


    26,339


 


 


 


    4,789


 


 


 


    31,128


 





Goodwill
    



 


 


    7,661


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    7,661


 





Other intangible assets, net
    



 


 


    2,290


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,290


 





Debt issuance costs, net
    



 


 


    567


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    567


 





Lease receivable, less current
    portion
    



 


 


    787


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    787


 





Other
    



 


 


    40


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    40


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Assets
    



 


    $


    48,873


 


 


    $


    4,789


 


 


    $


    53,662


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 





Liabilities and
    Stockholders’ Equity






Current maturities of long-term
    debt
    



 


    $


    3,992


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    3,992


 





Trade accounts payable
    



 


 


    3,133


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,133


 





Accrued salaries, benefits and
    payroll taxes
    



 


 


    591


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    591


 





Accrued interest
    



 


 


    152


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    152


 





Accrued expenses
    



 


 


    1,761


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,761


 





Accounts payable, related parties
    



 


 


    787


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    787


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current liabilities
    



 


 


    10,416


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    10,416


 





Accrued postretirement benefit
    obligations
    



 


 


    545


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    545


 





Long-term debt, net of current
    maturities
    



 


 


    28,241


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    28,241


 





Other long-term liabilities
    



 


 


    270


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    270


 





Redeemable warrants
    



 


 


    1,500


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,500


 





Redeemable convertible preferred
    stock and dividends
    



 


 


    4,171


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,171


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Liabilities
    



 


 


    45,143


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    45,143


 





Commitments and contingencies
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Minority interests
    



 


 


    2,523


 


 


 


    1,455


 


 


 


    3,978


 





Stockholders’
    Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Common stock
    



 


 


    39


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    39


 





Capital in excess of par value
    



 


 


    9,793


 


 


 


    955


 


 


 


    10,748


 





Accumulated (deficit)
    



 


 


    (8,625


    )


 


 


    2,379


 


 


 


    (6,246


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Stockholders’ Equity
    



 


 


    1,207


 


 


 


    3,334


 


 


 


    4,541


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Liabilities and
    Stockholders’ Equity
    



 


    $


    48,873


 


 


    $


    4,789


 


 


    $


    53,662


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    61



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

Increase
    in Net Income.

 

    Under joint venture accounting, no gain or loss was recognized
    in connection with the formation of AirComp. Under purchase
    accounting, we recorded a $2.4 million non-operating gain
    in the third quarter of 2003.

 

    As a result of the increase in fixed assets, depreciation
    expense was increased for the year ended December 31, 2003
    by $98,000 and minority interest expense decreased by $44,000,
    resulting in a reduction in net income attributable to common
    stockholders of $54,000. However, as a result of recording the
    non-operating gain, net income attributed to common stockholders
    increased by $2.4 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2003.

 

    A restated consolidated income statement reflecting the above
    adjustments follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Year Ended December 31,
    2003


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


Restatement



 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Revenue
    



 


    $


    32,724


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    32,724


 





Cost of revenues
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Direct costs
    



 


 


    21,977


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    21,977


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    1,954


 


 


 


    98


 


 


 


    2,052


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Gross margin
    



 


 


    8,793


 


 


 


    (98


    )


 


 


    8,695


 





General and administrative expense
    



 


 


    5,285


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    5,285


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    884


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    884


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income (loss) from operations
    



 


 


    2,624


 


 


 


    (98


    )


 


 


    2,526


 





Other income (expense):
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Interest, net
    



 


 


    (2,464


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,464


    )





Settlement on lawsuit
    



 


 


    1,034


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,034


 





Gain on sale of stock in a
    subsidiary
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,433


 


 


 


    2,433


 





Other
    



 


 


    111


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    111


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total other income (expense)
    



 


 


    (1,319


    )


 


 


    2,433


 


 


 


    1,114


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income before minority
    interest and income taxes
    



 


 


    1,305


 


 


 


    2,335


 


 


 


    3,640


 





Minority interest in income of
    subsidiaries
    



 


 


    (387


    )


 


 


    44


 


 


 


    (343


    )





Provision for foreign income tax
    



 


 


    (370


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (370


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


 


    548


 


 


 


    2,379


 


 


 


    2,927


 





Preferred stock dividend
    



 


 


    (656


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (656


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common stockholders
    



 


    $


    (108


    )


 


    $


    2,379


 


 


    $


    2,271


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income per common
    share — basic
    



 


    $


    (0.03


    )


 


 


 


 


 


    $


    0.58


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    (0.03


    )


 


 


 


 


 


    $


    0.39


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    3,927


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


    3,927


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    5,761


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


    5,761


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    62



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    A restated consolidated statement of cash flows reflecting the
    adjustments follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Year Ended December 31,
    2003


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


Restatement



 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Cash Flows From Operating
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    548


 


 


    $


    2,379


 


 


    $


    2,927


 





Adjustments to reconcile net
    income to net cash provided by operating activities:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation and amortization
    expense
    



 


 


    2,838


 


 


 


    98


 


 


 


    2,936


 





Amortization of discount on debt
    



 


 


    516


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    516


 





(Gain) on change PBO liability
    



 


 


    (125


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (125


    )





(Gain) on settlement of lawsuit
    



 


 


    (1,034


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (1,034


    )





(Gain) on sale of interest in
    AirComp
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,433


    )


 


 


    (2,433


    )





Minority interest in income of
    subsidiaries
    



 


 


    387


 


 


 


    (44


    )


 


 


    343


 





Loss on sale of property
    



 


 


    82


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    82


 





Changes in operating assets and
    liabilities:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





(Increase) in accounts receivable
    



 


 


    (4,414


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (4,414


    )





(Increase) in other current assets
    



 


 


    (1,260


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (1,260


    )





Decrease in other assets
    



 


 


    1


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1


 





Decrease in lease deposit
    



 


 


    525


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    525


 





Increase in accounts payable
    



 


 


    2,251


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,251


 





(Decrease) in accrued interest
    



 


 


    (126


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (126


    )





Increase in accrued expenses
    



 


 


    397


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    397


 





Increase in accrued employee
    benefits and payroll taxes
    



 


 


    1,293


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,293


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided by operating
    activities
    



 


 


    1,879


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,879


 





Cash Flows From Investing
    Activities:  
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Purchase of equipment
    



 


 


    (5,354


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (5,354


    )





Proceeds from sale of equipment
    



 


 


    843


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    843


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash used by investing
    activities
    



 


 


    (4,511


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (4,511


    )





Cash Flows From Financing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Proceeds from issuance of
    long-term debt
    



 


 


    14,127


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    14,127


 





Repayments of long-term debt
    



 


 


    (10,826


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (10,826


    )





Repayments on related party debt
    



 


 


    (246


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (246


    )





Borrowing on lines of credit
    



 


 


    30,537


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    30,537


 





Repayments on lines of credit
    



 


 


    (29,399


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (29,399


    )





Debt issuance costs
    



 


 


    (408


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (408


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided by financing
    activities
    



 


 


    3,785


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,785


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net decrease in cash and cash
    equivalents
    



 


 


    1,153


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,153


 





Cash and cash equivalents at
    beginning of the year
    



 


 


    146


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    146


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash and cash equivalents at end
    of the period
    



 


    $


    1,299


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    1,299


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Supplemental
    information:  
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Interest paid
    



 


    $


    2,341


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    2,341


 







    63



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In addition, the 2004 financial statements have been restated
    from the previously filed interim financial statements included
    in
    Form 10-Q
    for the first, second and third quarters of 2004. The effect of
    the restatement on the individual quarterly financial statements
    is as follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months



 


 


Three Months



 


 


Three Months



 




 


 


Ended



 


 


Ended



 


 


Ended



 




 


 


March 31,



 


 


June 30,



 


 


September 30,



 




 


 


2004


 


 


2004


 


 


2004


 



 





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common stockholders
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Previously reported
    



 


    $


    501


 


 


    $


    434


 


 


    $


    576


 





Adjustment — depreciation
    expense
    



 


 


    (139


    )


 


 


    (79


    )


 


 


    (79


    )





Adjustment — minority
    interest expense
    



 


 


    22


 


 


 


    22


 


 


 


    22


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Restated
    



 


    $


    384


 


 


    $


    377


 


 


    $


    519


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income (loss) per share, basic
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Previously reported
    



 


    $


    0.13


 


 


    $


    0.07


 


 


    $


    0.05


 





Total adjustments
    



 


 


    (0.03


    )


 


 


    (0.01


    )


 


 


    (0.01


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Restated
    



 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.06


 


 


    $


    0.04


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    In addition, the accompanying 2003 financial statements have
    been restated from the previously filed interim financial
    statements included in
    Form 10-Q
    for the first, second and third quarters of 2003. An adjustment
    was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2003 to reflect a change
    in estimate of the recoverability of foreign taxes paid in 2002
    and 2003. The effect of the significant fourth quarter
    adjustment on the individual quarterly financial statements is
    as follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months



 


 


Three Months



 


 


Three Months



 




 


 


Ended



 


 


Ended



 


 


Ended



 




 


 


March 31,



 


 


June 30,



 


 


September 30,



 




 


 


2003


 


 


2003


 


 


2003


 



 





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common stockholders
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Previously reported
    



 


    $


    (183


    )


 


    $


    (330


    )


 


    $


    1,136


 





Adjustment — gain
    on sale of stock in a subsidiary
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,433


 





Adjustment — depreciation
    expense
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (49


    )





Adjustment — minority
    interest expense
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    22


 





Adjustment — foreign
    tax expense
    



 


 


    (158


    )


 


 


    (92


    )


 


 


    (93


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Restated
    



 


    $


    (341


    )


 


    $


    (422


    )


 


    $


    3,449


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income (loss) per share, basic
    and diluted
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Previously reported
    



 


    $


    (0.05


    )


 


    $


    (0.08


    )


 


    $


    0.29


 





Total adjustments
    



 


 


    (0.04


    )


 


 


    (0.03


    )


 


 


    0.58


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Restated
    



 


    $


    (0.09


    )


 


    $


    (0.11


    )


 


    $


    0.87


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 3 — 


POST
    RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS



 

Medical
    And Life

 

    Pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization that was confirmed by the
    Bankruptcy Court after acceptances by our creditors and
    stockholders and was consummated on December 2, 1988, we
    assumed the contractual obligation to Simplicity Manufacturing,
    Inc. (SMI) to reimburse SMI for 50% of the actual cost of
    medical and life insurance claims for a select group of retirees
    (SMI Retirees) of the prior Simplicity Manufacturing



    64



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    Division of Allis-Chalmers. The actuarial present value of the
    expected retiree benefit obligation is determined by an actuary
    and is the amount that results from applying actuarial
    assumptions to (1) historical claims-cost data,
    (2) estimates for the time value of money (through
    discounts for interest) and (3) the probability of payment
    (including decrements for death, disability, withdrawal, or
    retirement) between today and expected date of benefit payments.
    As of December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, we have
    post-retirement benefit obligations of $335,000, $687,000 and
    $545,000, respectively.

 

401(k)
    Savings Plan

 

    On June 30, 2003, we adopted the 401(k) Profit Sharing Plan
    (the “Plan”). The Plan is a defined contribution
    savings plan designed to provide retirement income to our
    eligible employees. The Plan is intended to be qualified under
    Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
    amended. It is funded by voluntary pre-tax contributions from
    eligible employees who may contribute a percentage of their
    eligible compensation, limited and subject to statutory limits.
    The Plan is also funded by discretionary matching employer
    contributions from us. Eligible employees cannot participate in
    the Plan until they have attained the age of 21 and completed
    six-months of service with us. Each participant is 100% vested
    with respect to the participants’ contributions while our
    matching contributions are vested over a three-year period in
    accordance with the Plan document. Contributions are invested,
    as directed by the participant, in investment funds available
    under the Plan. Matching contributions of approximately
    $114,000, $35,000 and $10,000 were paid in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
    respectively.

 







NOTE 4 — 


ACQUISITIONS



 

    In July 2003, through our subsidiary Mountain Air, we entered
    into a limited liability company operating agreement with a
    division of M-I, a joint venture between Smith International and
    Schlumberger N.V. (Schlumberger Limited), to form AirComp,
    a Texas limited liability company. The assets contributed by
    Mountain Air were recorded at Mountain Air’s historical
    cost of $6.3 million, and the assets contributed by M-I
    were recorded at a fair market value of $10.3 million. We
    originally owned 55% and M-I originally owned 45% of AirComp. As
    a result of our controlling interest and operating control, we
    consolidated AirComp in our financial statements. AirComp
    comprises the compressed air drilling services segment.

 

    In September 2004, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of
    Safco for $1.0 million. Safco leases spiral drill pipe and
    provides related oilfield services to the oil drilling industry.

 

    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of Tubular in
    exchange for 1.3 million shares of our common stock. The
    total value of the consideration paid to the seller, Jens
    Mortensen, was $6.4 million which was equal to the number
    of shares of common stock issued to Mr. Mortensen
    (1.3 million) multiplied by the last sale price ($4.95) of
    the common stock as reported on the American Stock Exchange on
    the date of issuance. This amount was treated as a contribution
    to stockholders’ equity. On the balance sheet, the
    $1.9 million minority interest in Tubular was eliminated.
    The balance of the contribution of $4.4 million was
    allocated as follows: In June 2004, we obtained an appraisal of
    the fixed assets of Tubular which valued the fixed assets at
    $20.1 million. The book value of the fixed assets was
    $15.8 million and the fixed assets appraised value was
    $4.3 million over the book value. We increased the value of
    our fixed assets by 19% of the amount of the excess of the
    appraised value over the book value, or $.8 million. The
    remaining balance of $3.6 million was allocated to goodwill.

 

    In November 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all the assets
    of Diamond Air for $4.6 million in cash and the assumption
    of approximately $450,000 of accrued liabilities. We contributed
    $2.5 million and
    M-I L.L.C.
    contributed $2.1 million to AirComp LLC in order to fund
    the purchase. Goodwill of $375,000 and other intangible assets
    of $2.3 million were recorded in connection with the
    acquisition. Diamond Air provides air drilling technology and
    products to the oil and gas industry in West Texas, New Mexico
    and Oklahoma. Diamond Air is a leading provider of air hammers
    and hammer bit products.



    65



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In December 2004, we acquired Downhole for approximately
    $1.1 million in cash, 568,466 shares of our common
    stock and the assumption of approximately $950,000 of debt.
    Goodwill of $442,000 and other intangible assets of $795,000
    were recorded in connection with the acquisition. Downhole
    provides economical chemical treatments to wells by inserting
    small diameter, stainless steel coiled tubing into producing oil
    and gas wells.

 

    On April 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock
    of Delta for $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of
    our common stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000. The
    purchase price was allocated to fixed assets and inventory.
    Delta, located in Lafayette, Louisiana, is a rental tool company
    providing specialty rental items to the oil and gas industry
    such as spiral heavy weight drill pipe, test plugs used to test
    blow-out preventors, well head retrieval tools, spacer spools
    and assorted handling tools.

 

    On May 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital
    stock of Capcoil for $2.7 million in cash,
    168,161 shares of our common stock and the payment or
    assumption of approximately $1.3 million of debt. Capcoil,
    located in Kilgore, Texas, is engaged in downhole well servicing
    by providing coil tubing services to enhance production from
    existing wells. Goodwill of $184,000 and other identifiable
    intangible assets of $1.4 million were recorded in
    connection with the acquisition.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T., based in South Texas, for $6.0 million in
    cash. The equipment includes compressors, boosters, mist pumps
    and vehicles. Goodwill of $82,000 and other identifiable
    intangible assets of $1.5 million were recorded in
    connection with the acquisition.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I its 45% interest in
    AirComp and subordinated note in the principal amount of
    $4.8 million issued by AirComp, for which we paid M-I
    $7.1 million in cash and issued to M-I a $4.0 million
    subordinated note bearing interest at 5% per annum. As a
    result, we now own 100% of AirComp

 

    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding capital stock of Target for $1.3 million in
    cash and forgiveness of a lease receivable of approximately
    $0.6 million. The purchase price was allocated to the fixed
    assets of Target and resulted in the recording of a
    $0.8 million deferred tax liability. The results of Target
    are included in our directional and horizontal drilling segment
    as their Measure While Drilling equipment is utilized in that
    segment.

 

    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for approximately
    $15.6 million. These assets are located in Corpus Christi,
    Texas; Kilgore, Texas; Lafayette, Louisiana and Houma, Louisiana.

 

    The acquisitions were accounted for using the purchase method of
    accounting. The results of operations of the acquired entities
    since the date of acquisition are included in our consolidated
    income statement.

 

    The following unaudited pro forma consolidated summary financial
    information for the year ended December 31, 2005
    illustrates the effects of the acquisitions of Delta, Capcoil,
    W.T. and the minority interest in AirComp as if the acquisitions
    had occurred as of January 1, 2005, based on the historical
    results of the acquisitions. The following unaudited pro forma
    consolidated summary financial information for the years ended
    December 31, 2004 and 2003 illustrates the effects of the
    acquisitions of Diamond Air, Downhole, Delta, Capcoil, W.T. and
    the minority interest in AirComp as if the acquisitions had
    occurred as of beginning



    66



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    of the period, based on the historical results of the
    acquisitions (unaudited) (in thousands, except per share
    amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    110,383


 


 


    $


    70,988


 


 


    $


    52,588


 





Operating income
    



 


    $


    14,143


 


 


    $


    8,233


 


 


    $


    4,276


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    8,180


 


 


    $


    4,000


 


 


    $


    2,459


 





Net income per common share
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.55


 


 


    $


    0.46


 


 


    $


    0.53


 





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.48


 





 







NOTE 5 — 


INVENTORIES



 

    Inventories are comprised of the following (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31,



 


 


December 31,



 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Hammer bits
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Finished goods
    



 


    $


    1,402


 


 


    $


    857


 





Work in process
    



 


 


    787


 


 


 


    385


 





Raw materials
    



 


 


    233


 


 


 


    151


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total hammer bits
    



 


 


    2,422


 


 


 


    1,393


 





Hammers
    



 


 


    584


 


 


 


    417


 





Drive pipe
    



 


 


    666


 


 


 


    —


 





Rental supplies
    



 


 


    64


 


 


 


    —


 





Chemicals
    



 


 


    201


 


 


 


    254


 





Coiled tubing and related inventory
    



 


 


    1,145


 


 


 


    309


 





Shop supplies and related inventory
    



 


 


    863


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total inventory
    



 


    $


    5,945


 


 


    $


    2,373


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 6 — 


PROPERTY
    AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS



 

    Property and equipment is comprised of the following at
    December 31 (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Depreciation



 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Period


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Land
    



 


—
    


 


    $


    27


 


 


    $


    27


 





Building and improvements
    



 


15-20 years
    


 


 


    637


 


 


 


    633


 





Transportation equipment
    



 


3-7 years
    


 


 


    7,772


 


 


 


    4,854


 





Machinery and equipment
    



 


3-20 years
    


 


 


    77,002


 


 


 


    36,411


 





Furniture, computers, software and
    leasehold improvements
    



 


3-7 years
    


 


 


    2,073


 


 


 


    1,005


 





Construction in
    progress — equipment
    



 


N/A
    


 


 


    3,059


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


 


 


 


    90,570


 


 


 


    42,930


 





Less: accumulated depreciation
    



 


 


 


 


    (9,996


    )


 


 


    (5,251


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Property and equipment, net
    



 


 


 


    $


    80,574


 


 


    $


    37,679


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    67



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    The net book value of equipment recorded under capital leases
    was $908 and $0 at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.

 

    Intangible assets are as follows at December 31 (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Amortization



 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Period


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Intellectual property
    



 


20 years
    


 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    1,009


 





Non-compete agreements
    



 


3-5 years
    


 


 


    4,630


 


 


 


    2,856


 





Patent
    



 


15 years
    


 


 


    496


 


 


 


    496


 





Other intangible assets
    



 


3-10
    years
    


 


 


    3,811


 


 


 


    2,732


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


 


 


    $


    9,946


 


 


    $


    7,093


 





Less: accumulated amortization
    



 


 


 


 


    (3,163


    )


 


 


    (2,036


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Intangibles assets, net
    



 


 


 


    $


    6,783


 


 


    $


    5,057


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


Gross



 


 


Accumulated



 


 


Current Year



 


 


Gross



 


 


Accumulated



 


 


Current Year



 




 


 


Value


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Value


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Amortization


 



 





Intellectual property
    



 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    293


 


 


    $


    54


 


 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    239


 


 


    $


    56


 





Non-compete agreements
    



 


 


    4,630


 


 


 


    1,916


 


 


 


    884


 


 


 


    2,856


 


 


 


    1,032


 


 


 


    300


 





Patent
    



 


 


    496


 


 


 


    39


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    496


 


 


 


    6


 


 


 


    6


 





Other intangible assets
    



 


 


    3,811


 


 


 


    915


 


 


 


    277


 


 


 


    2,732


 


 


 


    759


 


 


 


    420


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    9,946


 


 


    $


    3,163


 


 


    $


    1,248


 


 


    $


    7,093


 


 


    $


    2,036


 


 


    $


    782


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Future amortization of intangible assets at December 31,
    2005 is as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Intangible Amortization by
    Period


 




 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


2010 and



 




 


 


2006


 


 


2007


 


 


2008


 


 


2009


 


 


Thereafter


 



 





Intellectual property
    



 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    496


 





Non-compete agreements
    



 


 


    1,043


 


 


 


    804


 


 


 


    480


 


 


 


    327


 


 


 


    60


 





Patent
    



 


 


    33


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    325


 





Other intangible assets
    



 


 


    395


 


 


 


    370


 


 


 


    359


 


 


 


    359


 


 


 


    1,413


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Intangible Amortization
    



 


    $


    1,526


 


 


    $


    1,262


 


 


    $


    927


 


 


    $


    774


 


 


    $


    2,294


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    68



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 







NOTE 7 — 


INCOME
    TAXES



 

    The income tax provision consists of the following (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Current Provision
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Federal
    



 


    $


    123


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 





State
    



 


 


    595


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Foreign
    



 


 


    626


 


 


 


    514


 


 


 


    370


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    1,344


 


 


    $


    514


 


 


    $


    370


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    We are required to file a consolidated U.S. federal income
    tax return. We pay foreign income taxes in Mexico related to
    Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services’ Mexico revenues. There are
    approximately $1.6 million of U.S. foreign tax credits
    available to us and of that amount, the available
    U.S. foreign tax credits may or may not be recoverable by
    us depending upon the availability of taxable income in future
    years and therefore, have not been recorded as an asset as of
    December 31, 2005. Our foreign tax credits begin to expire
    in the year 2007.

 

    The following table reconciles the U.S. statutory tax rate
    to our actual tax rate:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Income tax expense based on the
    U.S. statutory tax rate
    



 


 


    34.0


    %


 


 


    34.0


    %


 


 


    34.0


    %





State taxes, net of federal benefit
    



 


 


    6.1


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Foreign income at other than
    U.S. rate
    



 


 


    7.3


 


 


 


    36.6


 


 


 


    11.2


 





Valuation allowances
    



 


 


    (98.7


    )


 


 


    (209.4


    )


 


 


    28.6


 





Nondeductible items, permanent
    differences and other
    



 


 


    67.1


 


 


 


    175.4


 


 


 


    (62.6


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Effective tax rate
    



 


 


    15.8


    %


 


 


    36.6


    %


 


 


    11.2


    %




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Temporary differences are differences between the tax basis of
    assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the
    financial statements that will result in differences between
    income for tax purposes and income for financial statement
    purposes in future years. A valuation allowance is established
    for deferred tax assets when management, based upon available
    information, considers it more likely than not that a benefit
    from such assets will not be realized. We have recorded a
    valuation allowance equal to the excess of deferred tax assets
    over deferred tax liabilities as we were unable to determine
    that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will
    be realized.

 

    The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains provisions that limit the
    utilization of net operating loss and tax credit carry forwards
    if there has been a “change of ownership” as described
    in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. Such a change
    of ownership may limit the our utilization of our net operating
    loss and tax credit carry forwards, and could be triggered by a
    public offering or by subsequent sales of securities by us or
    our stockholders.



    69



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    Deferred income tax assets and the related allowance as of
    December 31, were as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Deferred non-current income tax
    assets:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net future (taxable) deductible
    items
    



 


    $


    384


 


 


    $


    533


 





Net operating loss carry forwards
    



 


 


    5,656


 


 


 


    4,894


 





A-C Reorganization Trust claims
    



 


 


    29,098


 


 


 


    30,112


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total deferred non-current income
    tax assets
    



 


 


    35,138


 


 


 


    35,539


 





Valuation allowance
    



 


 


    (27,131


    )


 


 


    (30,367


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net deferred non-current income
    taxes
    



 


    $


    8,007


 


 


    $


    5,172


 





Deferred non-current income tax
    liabilities
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation
    



 


    $


    (8,007


    )


 


    $


    (5,172


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net deferred income tax assets
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Net operating loss carry forwards for tax purposes at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004 were estimated to be
    $16.6 million and $14.5 million, respectively,
    expiring through 2024.

 

    Net future tax-deductible items relate primarily to timing
    differences. Our 1988 Plan of Reorganization established the A-C
    Reorganization Trust to settle claims and to make distributions
    to creditors and certain stockholders. We transferred cash and
    certain other property to the A-C Reorganization Trust on
    December 2, 1988. Payments made by us to the A-C
    Reorganization Trust did not generate tax deductions for us upon
    the transfer but generate deductions for us as the A-C
    Reorganization Trust makes payments to holders of claims.

 

    The Plan of Reorganization also created a trust to process and
    liquidate product liability claims. Payments made by the A-C
    Reorganization Trust to the product liability trust did not
    generate current tax deductions for us upon the payment but
    generate deductions for us as the product liability trust makes
    payments to liquidate claims or incurs other expenses.

 

    We believe the above-named trusts are grantor trusts and
    therefore we include the income or loss of these trusts in our
    income or loss for tax purposes, resulting in an adjustment of
    the tax basis of net operating and capital loss carry forwards.
    The income or loss of these trusts is not included in our
    results of operations for financial reporting purposes.



    70



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 







NOTE 8 — 


DEBT



 

    Our long-term debt consists of the following: (in thousands)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Bank term loans
    



 


    $


    42,090


 


 


    $


    13,373


 





Revolving line of credit
    



 


 


    6,400


 


 


 


    3,873


 





Subordinated note payable to M-I
    LLC
    



 


 


    4,000


 


 


 


    4,818


 





Subordinated seller note
    



 


 


    3,031


 


 


 


    4,000


 





Seller note
    



 


 


    850


 


 


 


    1,600


 





Notes payable under non-compete
    agreements
    



 


 


    698


 


 


 


    664


 





Notes payable to former directors
    



 


 


    96


 


 


 


    402


 





Notes payable to former
    shareholders
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    49


 





Real estate loan
    



 


 


    548


 


 


 


    —


 





Vendor financing
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,164


 





Equipment & vehicle
    installment notes
    



 


 


    1,939


 


 


 


    530


 





Capital lease obligations
    



 


 


    917


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total debt
    



 


 


    60,569


 


 


 


    30,473


 





Less: short-term debt and current
    maturities
    



 


 


    5,632


 


 


 


    5,541


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Long-term debt obligations
    



 


    $


    54,937


 


 


    $


    24,932


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, our debt was
    approximately $60.6 million and $30.5 million,
    respectively. Our weighted average interest rate for all of our
    outstanding debt was approximately 7.5% at December 31,
    2005 and 7.3% at December 31, 2004.

 

    Maturities of debt obligations at December 31, 2005 are as
    follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Debt


 


 


Capital Leases


 


 


Total


 



 





Year Ending:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





December 31, 2006
    



 


    $


    5,158


 


 


    $


    474


 


 


    $


    5,632


 





December 31, 2007
    



 


 


    49,620


 


 


 


    443


 


 


 


    50,063


 





December 31, 2008
    



 


 


    4,267


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,267


 





December 31, 2009
    



 


 


    69


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    69


 





December 31, 2010
    



 


 


    538


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    538


 





Thereafter
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    59,652


 


 


    $


    917


 


 


    $


    60,569


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

  Bank
    loans and line of credit agreements

 

    On July 11, 2005, we replaced our previous credit agreement
    with a new agreement that provided for the following senior
    secured credit facilities:

 







 
    • 


    A $13.0 million revolving line of credit. Borrowings were
    limited to 85% of eligible accounts receivable plus 50% of
    eligible inventory (up to a maximum of $2.0 million of
    borrowings based on inventory). This line of credit was used to
    finance working capital requirements and other general corporate
    purposes, including the issuance of standby letters of credit.
    Outstanding borrowings under





    71



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    this line of credit were $6.4 million at a margin above
    prime and LIBOR rates plus margin averaging approximately 8.1%
    as of December 31, 2005.

 







 
    • 


    Two term loans totaling $42.0 million. Outstanding
    borrowings under these term loans were $42.0 million as of
    December 31, 2005. These loans were at LIBOR rates plus a
    margin which averages approximately 7.8%.



 

    We borrowed against the July 2005 facilities to refinance our
    prior credit facility and the AirComp credit facility, to fund
    the acquisition of M-I’s interest in AirComp and the air
    drilling assets of W.T. and to pay transaction costs related to
    the refinancing and the acquisitions. We incurred debt
    retirement expense of $1.1 million related to the
    refinancing. This amount includes prepayment penalties and the
    write-off of deferred financing fees of the previous financing,
    which has been included in interest expense in the consolidated
    statement of operations.

 

    Borrowings under the July 2005 credit facilities were to mature
    in July 2007. Amounts outstanding under the term loans as of
    July 2006 were to be repaid in monthly principal payments based
    on a 48 month repayment schedule with the remaining balance
    due at maturity. Additionally, during the second year, we were
    to be required to prepay the remaining balance of the term loans
    by 75% of excess cash flow, if any, after debt service and
    capital expenditures. The interest rate payable on borrowings
    was based on a margin over the London Interbank Offered Rate,
    referred to as LIBOR, or the prime rate, and there was a 0.5%
    fee on the undrawn portion of the revolving line of credit. The
    margin over LIBOR was to increase by 1.0% in the second year.
    The credit facilities were secured by substantially all of our
    assets and contain customary events of default and financial and
    other covenants, including limitations on our ability to incur
    additional indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay
    dividends or make other distributions, create liens and sell
    assets.

 

    All amounts outstanding under our July 2005 credit agreement
    were paid off with the proceeds of our senior notes offering in
    January 2006. We executed an amended and restated credit
    agreement which provides a $25.0 million revolving line of
    credit (See Note 22).

 

    Prior to July 11, 2005, we had a credit agreement dated
    December 7, 2004 that provided for the following credit
    facilities:

 







 
    • 


    A $10.0 million revolving line of credit. Borrowings were
    limited to 85% of eligible accounts receivables, as defined.
    Outstanding borrowings under this line of credit were
    $2.4 million as of December 31, 2004.


 

 
    • 


    A term loan in the amount of $6.3 million to be repaid in
    monthly payments of principal of $105,583 per month. We
    were also required to prepay this term loan by an amount equal
    to 20% of receipts from our largest customer in Mexico. Proceeds
    of the term loan were used to prepay the term loan owed by
    Tubular Services and to prepay the 12% $2.4 million
    subordinated note and retire its related warrants. The
    outstanding balance was $6.3 million as of
    December 31, 2004.


 

 
    • 


    A $6.0 million capital expenditure and acquisition line of
    credit. Borrowings under this facility were payable monthly over
    four years beginning in January 2006. Availability of this
    capital expenditure term loan facility was subject to security
    acceptable to the lender in the form of equipment or other
    acquired collateral. There were no outstanding borrowings as of
    December 31, 2004.



 

    These credit facilities were to mature on December 31, 2007
    and were secured by liens on substantially all of our assets.
    The agreement governing these credit facilities contained
    customary events of default and financial covenants. It also
    limited our ability to incur additional indebtedness, make
    capital expenditures, pay dividends or make other distributions,
    create liens and sell assets. Interest accrued at an adjustable
    rate based on the prime rate and was 6.25% as of
    December 31, 2004. We paid a 0.5% per annum fee on the
    undrawn portion of the revolving line of credit and the capital
    expenditure line.



    72



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In connection with the acquisition of Tubular and Strata in
    2002, we issued a 12% secured subordinated note in the original
    amount of $3.0 million. In connection with this
    subordinated note, we issued redeemable warrants valued at
    $1.5 million, which were recorded as a discount to the
    subordinated debt and as a liability. The discount was amortized
    over the life of the subordinated note beginning
    February 6, 2002 as additional interest expense of which
    $350,000 and $300,000 were recognized in the years ended
    December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, respectively.
    The debt was recorded at $2.7 million at December 31,
    2003, net of the unamortized portion of the put obligation. On
    December 7, 2004, we prepaid the $2.4 million balance
    of the 12% subordinated note and retired the
    $1.5 million of warrants, with a portion of the proceeds
    from our $6.3 million bank term loan.

 

    Prior to July 11, 2005, our AirComp subsidiary had the
    credit facilities described below. These credit facilities were
    repaid in connection with our acquisition of the minority
    interest in AirComp and the refinancing of our bank credit
    facilities described above.

 







 
    • 


    A $3.5 million bank line of credit. Interest accrued at an
    adjustable rate based on the prime rate. We paid a 0.5% per
    annum fee on the undrawn portion. Borrowings under the line of
    credit were subject to a borrowing base consisting of 80% of
    eligible accounts receivable. The balance at December 31,
    2004 was $1.5 million.


 

 
    • 


    A $7.1 million term loan that accrued interest at an
    adjustable rate based on either LIBOR or the prime rate.
    Principal payments of $286,000 plus interest were due quarterly,
    with a final maturity date of June 27, 2007. The balance at
    December 31, 2004 was $6.8 million.


 

 
    • 


    A “delayed draw” term loan facility in the amount of
    $1.5 million to be used for capital expenditures. Interest
    accrued at an adjustable rate based on either the LIBOR or the
    prime rate. Quarterly principal payments were to commence on
    March 31, 2006 in an amount equal to 5.0% of the
    outstanding balance as of December 31, 2005, with a final
    maturity of June 27, 2007. There were no borrowings
    outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2004.



 

    The AirComp credit facilities were secured by liens on
    substantially all of AirComp’s assets. The agreement
    governing these credit facilities contained customary events of
    default and required that AirComp satisfy various financial
    covenants. It also limited AirComp’s ability to incur
    additional indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay
    dividends or make other distributions, create liens and sell
    assets. We guaranteed 55% of the obligations of AirComp under
    these facilities.

 

    Tubular had two bank term loans with a remaining balance
    totaling $90,000 and $263,000 at December 31, 2005 and
    2004, with interest accruing at a floating interest rate based
    on prime plus 2.0%. The interest rate was 9.25% and 7.25% at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004. Monthly principal payments are
    $13,000 plus interest. The maturity date of one of the loans,
    with a balance of $60,000, was September 17, 2006, while
    the second loan, with a balance of $30,000, had a final maturity
    of January 12, 2007. The balances of these two loans were
    repaid in full in January 2006 with the proceeds from our senior
    notes offering.

 

Notes
    payable and real estate loan

 

    AirComp had a subordinated note payable to M-I in the amount of
    $4.8 million bearing interest at an annual rate of 5.0%. In
    2007 each party had the right to cause AirComp to sell its
    assets (or the other party may buy out such party’s
    interest), and in such event this note (including accrued
    interest) was due and payable. The note was also due and payable
    if M-I sells its interest in AirComp or upon a termination of
    AirComp. At December 31, 2004, $376,000 of interest was
    included in accrued interest. On July 11, 2005, we acquired
    from M-I its 45% equity interest in AirComp and the subordinated
    note in the principal amount of $4.8 million issued by
    AirComp, for which we paid M-I $7.1 million in cash and
    issued a new $4.0 million subordinated note bearing
    interest at 5% per annum. The subordinated note issued to
    M-I requires quarterly interest payments and the principal
    amount is due October 9, 2007. Contingent upon a future
    equity offering,



    73



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    the subordinated note is convertible into up to
    700,000 shares of our common stock at a conversion price
    equal to the market value of the common stock at the time of
    conversion.

 

    Tubular had a subordinated note payable to Jens Mortensen, the
    seller of Tubular and one of our directors, in the amount of
    $4.0 million with a fixed interest rate of 7.5%. Interest
    was payable quarterly and the final maturity of the note is
    January 31, 2006. The subordinated note was subordinated to
    the rights of our bank lenders. The balance outstanding for this
    note at December 31, 2005 and 2004 was $3.0 and
    $4.0 million, respectively. The balance of this
    subordinated note was repaid in full in January 2006 with
    proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 

    As part of the acquisition of Mountain Air in 2001, we issued a
    note to the sellers of Mountain Air in the original amount of
    $2.2 million accruing interest at a rate of 5.75% per
    annum. The note was reduced to $1.5 million as a result of
    the settlement of a legal action against the sellers in 2003. In
    March 2005, we reached an agreement with the sellers and holders
    of the note as a result of an action brought against us by the
    sellers. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid the holders
    of the note $1.0 million in cash, and agreed to pay an
    additional $350,000 on June 1, 2006, and an additional
    $150,000 on June 1, 2007, in settlement of all claims. (See
    Note 16). At December 31, 2005 and 2004 the
    outstanding amounts due were $500,000 and $1.6 million,
    including accrued interest.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Delta, we issued to the
    sellers a note in the amount of $350,000. The note bears
    interest at 2% and the principal and accrued interest is due on
    April 1, 2006.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Tubular, we agreed to pay a
    total of $1.2 million to Mr. Mortensen in exchange for
    a non-compete agreement. Monthly payments of $20,576 are due
    under this agreement through January 31, 2007. In
    connection with the purchase of Safco, we also agreed to pay a
    total of $150,000 to the sellers in exchange for a non-compete
    agreement. We are required to make annual payments of $50,000
    through September 30, 2007. In connection with the purchase
    of Capcoil, we agreed to pay a total of $500,000 to two
    management employees in exchange for non-compete agreements. We
    are required to make annual payments of $110,000 through May
    2008. Total amounts due under non-compete agreements at
    December 31, 2005 and 2004 were $698,000 and $664,000,
    respectively.

 

    In 2000 we compensated directors, including current directors
    Nederlander and Toboroff, who served on the board of directors
    from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation, by
    issuing promissory notes totaling $325,000. The notes bear
    interest at the rate of 5.0%. At December 31, 2005 and
    2004, the principal and accrued interest on these notes totaled
    approximately $96,000 and $402,000, respectively.

 

    Our subsidiary, Downhole, had notes payable to two former
    shareholders totaling $49,000. We were required to make monthly
    payments of $8,878 through June 30, 2005. At
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, the amounts outstanding were $0
    and $49,000.

 

    We also have a real estate loan which is payable in equal
    monthly installments of $4,344 with the remaining outstanding
    balance due on January 1, 2010. The loan has a floating
    interest rate based on prime plus 2.0%. The outstanding
    principal balance was $548,000 at December 31, 2005. The
    balance of this loan was prepaid in full in January 2006 with
    proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 

Other
    debt

 

    In December 2003, Strata, our directional drilling subsidiary,
    entered into a financing agreement with a major supplier of
    downhole motors for repayment of motor lease and repair cost
    totaling $1.7 million. The agreement provided for repayment
    of all amounts not later than December 30, 2005. Payment of
    interest was due monthly and principal payments of $582,000 were
    due on April 2005 and December 2005. The interest rate was fixed
    at 8.0%. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the outstanding
    balance was $0 and $1.2 million.



    74



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    We have various equipment financing loans with interest rates
    ranging from 5% to 11.5% and terms ranging from 2 to
    5 years. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the
    outstanding balances for equipment financing loans were
    $1.9 million and $530,000, respectively. We also have
    various capital leases with terms that expire in 2008. As of
    December 31, 2005 and 2004, amounts outstanding under
    capital leases were $917,000 and $0, respectively. In January
    2006, we prepaid $350,000 of the outstanding equipment loans
    with proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 







NOTE 9 — 


COMMITMENTS
    AND CONTINGENCIES



 

    We have placed orders for capital equipment totaling
    $6.8 million to be received and paid for through 2006. Of
    this amount, $3.1 million is for six measurement while
    drilling kits and ancillary equipment for our directional
    drilling segment and $3.7 million is for two new capillary
    tubing units and two new coil tubing units for our production
    services segment. Of the $6.8 million in orders, we are
    firmly committed to approximately $4.4 million as the
    balance may be subject to cancellation with minimal loss of
    prior cash deposits, if any.

 

    We rent office space on a five-year lease which expires November
    2009. We also rent certain other facilities and shop yards for
    equipment storage and maintenance. Facility rent expense for the
    years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003 was $987,000,
    $577,000, and $370,000, respectively.

 

    At December 31, 2005, future minimum rental commitments for
    all operating leases are as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Years Ending:
    



 


 


 


 





December 31, 2006
    



 


    $


    926


 





December 31, 2007
    



 


 


    833


 





December 31, 2008
    



 


 


    629


 





December 31, 2009
    



 


 


    446


 





December 31, 2010
    



 


 


    44


 





Thereafter
    



 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    2,878


 




 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 10 — 


STOCKHOLDERS’
    EQUITY



 

    In connection with the formation of AirComp in July 2003, we
    eliminated $955,000 of our negative investment in the assets
    contributed to AirComp. Under purchase accounting, we recognized
    a $955,000 increase in stockholders equity. For the year ended
    December 31, 2003, we accrued $350,000 of dividends payable
    to the Preferred Stock holders. No dividends were declared or
    paid.

 

    On March 3, 2004, we entered into an agreement with an
    investment banking firm whereby they would provide underwriting
    and fundraising activities on our behalf. In exchange for their
    services, the investment banking firm received a stock purchase
    warrant to purchase 340,000 shares of common stock at an
    exercise price of $2.50 per share. The warrant was
    exercised in August of 2005. The fair value of the total
    warrants issued in connection with the fundraising activities
    was established in accordance with the Black-Scholes valuation
    model and as a result, $641,000 was added to stockholders’
    equity. The following assumptions were utilized to determine
    fair value: no dividend yield; expected volatility of 89.7%;
    risk free interest rate of 7.00%; and expected life of five
    years.

 

    During 2004, we issued two warrants (“Warrants A and
    B”) for the purchase of 233,000 total shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share and one
    warrant for the purchase of 67,000 shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $5.00 per share
    (“Warrant C”) in connection with their



    75



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    subordinated debt financing. Warrants A and B were redeemed for
    a total of $1,500,000 on December 7, 2004. The fair value
    of Warrant C was established in accordance with the
    Black-Scholes valuation model and as a result, $47,000 was added
    to stockholders’ equity. The following assumptions were
    utilized to determine fair value: no dividend yield; expected
    volatility of 67.24%; risk free interest rate of 5.00%; and
    expected life of four years.

 

    On April 2, 2004, we completed the following transactions:

 







 
    • 


    In exchange for an investment of $2.0 million, we issued
    620,000 shares of our common stock for a purchase price
    equal to $2.50 per share, and issued warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $2.50 per share, expiring on April 1, 2006, to an
    investor group (the “Investor Group”) consisting of
    entities affiliated with Donald and Christopher Engel and
    directors Robert Nederlander and Leonard Toboroff. The aggregate
    purchase price for the common stock was $1.55 million and
    the fair value for the warrants was $450,000.


 

 
    • 


    Energy Spectrum converted its 3,500,000 shares of
    Series A 10% Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock,
    including accrued dividend rights, into 1,718,090 shares of
    common stock. Energy Spectrum was granted the preferred stock in
    connection with the Strata acquisition.



 

    On August 10, 2004, we completed the private placement of
    3,504,667 shares of our common stock at a price of
    $3.00 per share. Our net proceeds, after selling
    commissions and expenses, were approximately $9.6 million.
    We issued shares pursuant to an exemption from the Securities
    Act of 1933, and agreed to subsequently register the common
    stock under the Securities Act of 1933 to allow investors to
    resell the common stock in public markets.

 

    On September 30, 2004, we completed the private placement
    of 1,956,634 shares of our common stock at a price of
    $3.00 per share. Our net proceeds, after selling commission
    and expenses, were approximately $5.3 million. We issued
    shares pursuant to an exemption from the Securities Act of 1933,
    and agreed to subsequently register the common stock under the
    Securities Act of 1933 to allow investors to resell the common
    stock in public markets.

 

    On September 30, 2004, we issued 1.3 million shares of
    common stock to Jens Mortensen, a director, in exchange for his
    19% interest in Tubular. As a result of this transaction, we own
    100% of Tubular. The total value of the consideration paid to
    Jens was $6.4 million, which was equal to the number of
    shares of common stock issued to Mr. Mortensen multiplied
    by the last sale price ($4.95) of the common stock as reported
    on the American Stock Exchange on the date of issuance. This
    amount was treated as a contribution to stockholders equity.

 

    On December 10, 2004, we acquired Downhole for
    approximately $1.1 million in cash, 568,466 shares of
    our common stock and payment or assumption of $950,000 of debt.
    Approximately $2.2 million, the value of the common stock
    issued to Downhole’s sellers based on the closing price of
    our common stock issued at the date of the acquisition, was
    added to stockholders’ equity.

 

    As of January 1, 2005, in relation to the acquisition of
    Downhole, we executed a business development agreement with CTTV
    Investments LLC, an affiliate of ChevronTexaco Inc., whereby we
    issued 20,000 shares of our common stock to CTTV and
    further agreed to issue up to an additional 60,000 shares
    to CTTV contingent upon our subsidiaries receiving certain
    levels of revenues in 2005 from ChevronTexaco and its
    affiliates. CTTV was a minority owner of Downhole, which we
    acquired in 2004. Based on the terms of the agreement, no
    additional shares were issued in 2005.

 

    On April 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock
    of Delta, for $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of
    our common stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000.
    Approximately $1.0 million, the value of the common stock
    issued to Delta’s sellers based on the closing price of our
    common stock issued at the date of the acquisition, was added to
    stockholders’ equity.



    76



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    On May 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital
    stock of Capcoil for $2.7 million in cash,
    168,161 shares of our common stock and the payment or
    assumption of approximately $1.3 million of debt.
    Approximately $750,000, the value of the common stock issued to
    Capcoil’s sellers based on the closing price of our common
    stock issued at the date of the acquisition, was added to
    stockholders’ equity.

 

    In August 2005, our stockholders approved an amendment to our
    certificate of incorporation to increase the authorized number
    of shares of our common stock from 20 million to
    100 million and to increase our authorized preferred stock
    from 10 million shares to 25 million shares and, we
    completed a secondary public offering in which we sold
    1,761,034 shares for approximately $15.5 million, net
    of expenses.

 

    We also had options and warrants exercised during 2005. Those
    exercises resulted in 1,076,154 shares of our common stock
    being issued for $1.4 million.

 

NOTE 11 — REVERSE
    STOCK SPLIT

 

    We effected a reverse stock split on June 10, 2004. As a
    result of the reverse stock split, every five shares of our
    common stock was combined into one share of common stock. The
    reverse stock split reduced the number of shares of outstanding
    common stock from 31,393,789 to approximately 6,265,000 and
    reduced the number of our stockholders from 6,070 to
    approximately 2,140. All share and related amounts presented
    have been retroactively adjusted for the stock split.

 

NOTE 12 — STOCK
    OPTIONS

 

    In 2000, we issued stock options and promissory notes to certain
    current and former directors as compensation for services as
    directors (See Note 8), and our Board of Directors granted
    stock options to these same individuals. Options to purchase
    4,800 shares of our common stock were granted with an
    exercise price of $13.75 per share. These options vested
    immediately and may be exercised any time prior to
    March 28, 2010. As of December 31, 2005, none of the
    stock options had been exercised. No compensation expense has
    been recorded for these options that were issued with an
    exercise price equal to the fair value of the common stock at
    the date of grant.

 

    On May 31, 2001, the Board granted to Leonard Toboroff, one
    of our directors, an option to purchase 100,000 shares of
    our common stock at $2.50 per share, exercisable for
    10 years from October 15, 2001. The option was granted
    for services provided by Mr. Toboroff to OilQuip prior to
    the merger, including providing financial advisory services,
    assisting in OilQuip’s capital structure and assisting
    OilQuip in finding strategic acquisition opportunities. We
    recorded compensation expense of $500,000 for the issuance of
    the option for the year ended December 31, 2001.

 

    The 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended, permits us to grant
    to our key employees and outside directors various forms of
    stock incentives, including, among others, incentive and
    non-qualified stock options and restricted stock. Stock
    incentive terms are not to be in excess of ten years. As
    disclosed in Note 1, we account for our stock-based
    compensation using APB No. 25. We have adopted the
    disclosure-only provisions of SFAS No. 123 for the
    stock options granted to our employees and directors.
    Accordingly, no compensation cost has been recognized for these
    options.



    77



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    A summary of our stock option activity and related information
    is as follows:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31, 2005


 


 


December 31, 2004


 


 


December 31, 2003


 




 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Avg.



 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Avg.



 




 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 




 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 



 





Beginning balance
    



 


 


    1,215,000


 


 


    $


    3.20


 


 


 


    973,300


 


 


    $


    2.78


 


 


 


    104,800


 


 


    $


    3.00


 





Granted
    



 


 


    1,695,000


 


 


 


    6.44


 


 


 


    248,000


 


 


 


    4.85


 


 


 


    868,500


 


 


 


    2.75


 





Canceled
    



 


 


    (15,300


    )


 


 


    3.33


 


 


 


    (6,300


    )


 


 


    2.78


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Exercised
    



 


 


    (33,833


    )


 


 


    2.80


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Ending balance
    



 


 


    2,860,867


 


 


    $


    5.10


 


 


 


    1,215,000


 


 


    $


    3.20


 


 


 


    973,300


 


 


    $


    2.78


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The following table summarizes additional information about our
    stock options outstanding as of December 31, 2005:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted Average



 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


Shares Under



 


 


Remaining



 


 


 


 


 


 





Exercise Price



 


 



Option



 


 



Contractual Life



 



Options Exercisable



 


 



Exercise Price



 



 




    $


    2.50


 


 


 


    100,000


 


 


5.79 years
    


 


 


    100,000


 


 


    $


    2.50


 




    $


    2.75


 


 


 


    829,067


 


 


7.96 years
    


 


 


    829,067


 


 


    $


    2.75


 




    $


    3.86


 


 


 


    920,000


 


 


9.09 years
    


 


 


    306,667


 


 


    $


    3.86


 




    $


    4.85


 


 


 


    259,000


 


 


8.73 years
    


 


 


    172,667


 


 


    $


    4.85


 




    $


    4.87


 


 


 


    154,000


 


 


9.40 years
    


 


 


    51,333


 


 


    $


    4.87


 




    $


    10.85


 


 


 


    594,000


 


 


9.96 years
    


 


 


    198,000


 


 


    $


    10.85


 




    $


    13.75


 


 


 


    4,800


 


 


4.24 years
    


 


 


    4,800


 


 


    $


    13.75


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




    $


    5.11


 


 


 


    2,860,867


 


 


8.82 years
    


 


 


    1,662,534


 


 


    $


    4.22


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

NOTE 13 — STOCK
    PURCHASE WARRANTS

 

    In conjunction with the Mountain Air purchase by OilQuip in
    February of 2001, Mountain Air issued a common stock warrant for
    620,000 shares to a third-party investment firm that
    assisted us in its initial identification and purchase of the
    Mountain Air assets. The warrant entitles the holder to acquire
    up to 620,000 shares of common stock of Mountain Air at an
    exercise price of $.01 per share over a nine-year period
    commencing on February 7, 2001.

 

    We issued two warrants (“Warrants A and B”) for the
    purchase of 233,000 total shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $0.75 per share and one warrant for the
    purchase of 67,000 shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $5.00 per share (“Warrant C”)
    in connection with our subordinated debt financing for Mountain
    Air in 2001. Warrants A and B were paid off on
    December  7, 2004. Warrant C is still outstanding at
    December 31, 2005.

 

    On February 6, 2002, in connection with the acquisition of
    substantially all of the outstanding stock of Strata, we issued
    a warrant for the purchase of 87,500 shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share over the term
    of four years. The warrants were exercised in August of 2005.

 

    In connection with the Strata Acquisition, on February 19,
    2003, we issued Energy Spectrum an additional warrant to
    purchase 175,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise
    price of $0.75 per share. The warrants were exercised in
    August of 2005.



    78



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In March 2004, we issued a warrant to purchase
    340,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $2.50 per share to Morgan Joseph & Co., in
    consideration of financial advisory services to be provided by
    Morgan Joseph pursuant to a consulting agreement. The warrants
    were exercised in August 2005.

 

    In April 2004, we issued warrants to purchase 20,000 shares
    of common stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share to
    Wells Fargo Credit, Inc., in connection with the extension of
    credit by Wells Fargo Credit Inc. The warrants were exercised in
    August 2005.

 

    In April 2004, we completed a private placement of
    620,000 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of common stock to the following investors:
    Christopher Engel; Donald Engel; the Engel Defined Benefit Plan;
    RER Corp., a corporation wholly-owned by director Robert
    Nederlander; and Leonard Toboroff, a director. The investors
    invested $1,550,000 in exchange for 620,000 shares of
    common stock for a purchase price equal to $2.50 per share,
    and invested $450,000 in exchange for warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of common stock at an exercise of
    $2.50 per share, expiring on April 1, 2006. A total of
    486,557 of these warrants were exercised in 2005.

 

    In May 2004, we issued a warrant to purchase 3,000 shares
    of our common stock at an exercise price of $4.75 per share
    to Jeffrey R. Freedman in consideration of financial advisory
    services to be provided by Mr. Freedman pursuant to a
    consulting agreement. The warrants were exercised in May 2004.
    Mr. Freedman was also granted 16,000 warrants in May of
    2004 exercisable at $4.65 per share. These warrants were
    exercised in November of 2005.

 

    Warrants for 4,000 shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $4.65 were also issued in May 2004 and remain
    outstanding as of December 31, 2005.

 

NOTE 14 — LEASE
    RECEIVABLE

 

    In June 2002, our subsidiary, Strata, sold its MWD assets to a
    third party for $1.3 million. Under the terms of the sale,
    we would receive at least $15,000 per month for thirty-six
    months. After thirty-six months, the purchaser had the option to
    pay the remaining balance or continue paying a minimum of
    $15,000 per month for twenty-four additional months. After the
    expiration of the additional twenty-four months, the purchaser
    would repay any remaining balance. This transaction had been
    accounted for as a direct financing lease with the nominal
    residual gain from the asset sale deferred into income over the
    life of the lease. In August of 2005, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of the buyer and the balance of the lease
    receivable was part of the consideration of the acquisition.
    During the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, we
    received a total of $146,000, $229,000, and $251,000,
    respectively, in payments from the third party related to this
    lease.

 

NOTE 15 — RELATED
    PARTY TRANSACTIONS

 

    In July 2005, we entered into a lease of a yard in Buffalo,
    Texas which is part owned by our Chief Operating Officer, David
    Wilde. The monthly rent is $3,500.

 

    Alya H. Hidayatallah, the daughter of our Chairman and Chief
    Executive Officer, Munawar H. Hidayatallah, has served as our
    Vice President-Planning and Development since April 2005. In
    2005, we paid Ms. Hidayatallah a salary at a rate of
    $80,000 per annum.

 

    At December 31, 2005 and 2004, we owed our Chief Executive
    Officer, $0 and $175,000, respectively, related to deferred
    compensation. In March and April of 2005 we paid all amounts due
    Mr. Hidayatallah.

 

    Until December 2004, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman,
    Munawar H. Hidayatallah and his wife were personal guarantors of
    substantially all of the financing extended to us by commercial
    banks. In December 2004, we refinanced most of our outstanding
    bank debt and obtained the release of certain guarantees. After
    the refinancing, Mr. Hidayatallah continued to guarantee
    the Tubular $4.0 million



    79



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    subordinated seller note until July 2005. We paid Mr.
    Hidayatallah an annual guarantee fee equal to one-quarter of one
    percent of the total amount of the debt guaranteed by
    Mr. Hidayatallah. These fees aggregated to $7,250 during
    2005 and were paid quarterly, in arrears, based upon the average
    amount of debt outstanding in the prior quarter.

 

    In April 2004, we entered into an oral consulting agreement with
    Leonard Toboroff, one of our directors, pursuant to which we pay
    him $10,000 per month to advise us regarding financing and
    acquisition opportunities.

 

    Jens Mortensen, one of our directors, is the former owner of
    Tubular and held a 19% minority interest in Tubular until
    September 30, 2004. He was also the holder of a
    $4.0 million subordinated note payable issued by Tubular
    and at December 31, 2005 was owed $60,000 in accrued
    interest and $267,000 related to a non-compete agreement. (See
    Note 8). The subordinated note was repaid in January of
    2006 (See Note 22) and the accrued interest was paid
    in January 2006. Mr. Mortensen, formerly the sole
    proprietor of Tubular, owns a shop yard which he leases to
    Jens’ on a monthly basis. Lease payments made under the
    terms of the lease were $16,800, $28,800 and $28,800 for the
    years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
    In addition, Mr. Mortensen and members of his family own
    100% of Tex-Mex Rental & Supply Co., a Texas
    corporation, that sold approximately $0, $167,000 and $173,000
    of equipment and other supplies to Tubular for the years ended
    December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.

 

    As described in Note 8, several of our former directors
    were issued promissory notes in 2000 in lieu of compensation for
    services. Our current maturities of long-term debt includes
    $96,000 and $402,000 as of December 31, 2005 and 2004,
    respectively, relative to these notes.

 

NOTE 16 — SETTLEMENT
    OF LAWSUIT

 

    In June 2003, our subsidiary, Mountain Air, filed a lawsuit
    against the former owners of Mountain Air Drilling Service
    Company for breach of the asset purchase agreement pursuant to
    which Mountain Air acquired Mountain Air Drilling Services
    Company, alleging that the sellers stored hazardous materials on
    the property leased by us without our consent and violated the
    non-compete clause in the asset purchase agreement. On
    July 15, 2003, we entered into a settlement agreement with
    the sellers. As of the date of the agreement, we owed the
    sellers a total of $2.6 million including $2.2 million
    in principal and approximately $363,000 in accrued interest. As
    part of the settlement agreement, the note payable to the
    sellers was reduced from $2.2 million to $1.5 million
    and the due date of the note payable was extended from
    February 6, 2006 to September 30, 2007. The lump-sum
    payment due the sellers at that date was $1.9 million. We
    recorded a one-time gain on the reduction of the note payable to
    the sellers of $1.0 million in the third quarter of 2003.
    The gain was calculated by discounting the note payable to
    $1.5 million using a present value calculation and
    accreting the note payable to $1.9 million the amount due
    in September 2007. In March 2005, we reached an agreement with
    the sellers to settle an action brought by the sellers under the
    note. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid
    $1.0 million in April of 2005 and will pay $350,000 on
    June 1, 2006 and the remaining $150,000 on June 1,
    2007, in settlement of all claims.

 

NOTE 17 — GAIN
    ON SALE OF INTEREST IN A SUBSIDIARY

 

    In July 2003, through the subsidiary Mountain Air, we entered
    into a limited liability company operating agreement with a
    division of M-I to form a Texas limited liability company named
    AirComp. Both companies contributed assets with a combined value
    of $16.6 million to AirComp. The contributed assets from
    Mountain Air were contributed at a historical book value of
    approximately $6.3 million and the assets contributed by
    M-I were
    contributed at a fair market value of approximately
    $10.3 million. Prior to the formation of AirComp, we owned
    100% of Mountain Air and after the formation of AirComp,
    Mountain Air owned 55% and M-I owned 45% of the business
    combination. The business combination was accounted for as a
    purchase and we recorded a one-time non-operating gain on the
    sale of the 45% interest in the subsidiary of



    80



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    approximately $2,433,000. The gain was calculated after
    recording the assets contributed by M-I of approximately
    $10.3 million less the subordinated note issued to M-I in
    the amount of approximately $4.8 million, recording
    minority interest of approximately $2,049,000 and an increase in
    equity of $955,000 in accordance with Staff Accounting
    Bulletin No. 51 (“SAB 51”). We have not
    recorded any deferred income taxes because the increase in
    assets and gain is a permanent timing difference. We have
    adopted a policy that any gain or loss in the future incurred on
    the sale in the stock or an interest of a subsidiary would be
    recognized as such in the income statement.

 

NOTE 18 — SEGMENT
    INFORMATION

 

    At December 31, 2005, we had five operating segments
    including: Directional Drilling Services (Strata and Target),
    Compressed Air Drilling Services (AirComp), Casing and Tubing
    Services (Tubular), Rental Tools (Safco and Delta) and
    Production Services (Downhole and Capcoil). All of the segments
    provide services to the energy industry. The revenues, operating
    income (loss), depreciation and amortization, capital
    expenditures and assets of each of the reporting segments plus
    the Corporate function are reported below for (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Revenues:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    43,901


 


 


    $


    24,787


 


 


    $


    16,008


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    25,662


 


 


 


    11,561


 


 


 


    6,679


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    20,932


 


 


 


    10,391


 


 


 


    10,037


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    5,059


 


 


 


    611


 


 


 


    —


 





Production services
    



 


 


    9,790


 


 


 


    376


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total revenues
    



 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    32,724


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Operating Income
    (Loss):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    7,389


 


 


    $


    3,061


 


 


    $


    1,103


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    5,612


 


 


 


    1,169


 


 


 


    17


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    4,994


 


 


 


    3,217


 


 


 


    3,628


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    1,300


 


 


 


    (71


    )


 


 


    —


 





Production services
    



 


 


    (99


    )


 


 


    4


 


 


 


    —


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    (5,978


    )


 


 


    (3,153


    )


 


 


    (2,123


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total income from operations
    



 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    4,227


 


 


    $


    2,625


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation and Amortization
    Expense:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    887


 


 


    $


    466


 


 


    $


    275


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    1,946


 


 


 


    1,329


 


 


 


    1,139


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    2,006


 


 


 


    1,597


 


 


 


    1,413


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    492


 


 


 


    40


 


 


 


    —


 





Production services
    



 


 


    912


 


 


 


    26


 


 


 


    —


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    418


 


 


 


    120


 


 


 


    109


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total depreciation and
    amortization expense
    



 


    $


    6,661


 


 


    $


    3,578


 


 


    $


    2,936


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


    81



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Capital Expenditures:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    2,922


 


 


    $


    1,552


 


 


    $


    1,066


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    7,008


 


 


 


    1,399


 


 


 


    2,093


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    5,207


 


 


 


    1,285


 


 


 


    2,176


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    435


 


 


 


    232


 


 


 


    —


 





Production services
    



 


 


    1,514


 


 


 


    106


 


 


 


    —


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    681


 


 


 


    29


 


 


 


    19


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total capital expenditures
    



 


    $


    17,767


 


 


    $


    4,603


 


 


    $


    5,354


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Goodwill:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    4,168


 


 


    $


    4,168


 


 


    $


    4,168


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    3,950


 


 


 


    3,510


 


 


 


    3,493


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    3,673


 


 


 


    3,673


 


 


 


    —


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Production services
    



 


 


    626


 


 


 


    425


 


 


 


    —


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total goodwill
    



 


    $


    12,417


 


 


    $


    11,776


 


 


    $


    7,661


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


As of
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Assets:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


    $


    20,960


 


 


    $


    14,166


 


 


    $


    11,529


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    46,045


 


 


 


    29,147


 


 


 


    22,735


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    45,351


 


 


 


    21,197


 


 


 


    18,191


 





Rental tools
    



 


 


    8,034


 


 


 


    1,291


 


 


 


    —


 





Production services
    



 


 


    12,282


 


 


 


    5,806


 


 


 


    —


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    4,683


 


 


 


    8,585


 


 


 


    1,207


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total assets
    



 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 


 


    $


    53,662


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Revenues:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





United States
    



 


    $


    98,583


 


 


    $


    42,466


 


 


    $


    28,995


 





International
    



 


 


    6,761


 


 


 


    5,260


 


 


 


    3,729


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total



 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    32,724


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






    82



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

NOTE 19 — SUPPLEMENTAL
    CASH FLOWS INFORMATION (in thousands)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended
    December 31,


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 




 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Interest paid
    



 


    $


    3,924


 


 


    $


    2,159


 


 


    $


    2,341


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income taxes paid
    



 


    $


    676


 


 


    $


    514


 


 


    $


    370


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Other non-cash investing and
    financing transactions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Sale of property &
    equipment in connection with direct financing lease
    (Note 14)
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





(Gain) on settlement of debt
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    (1,034


    )





Amortization of discount on debt
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    442


 





Purchase of equipment financed
    through assumption of debt or accounts payable
    



 


 


    592


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    906


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    592


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    314


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





AirComp formation:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Issuance of debt to joint venture
    by M-I
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    (4,818


    )





Contribution of property, plant
    and equipment by M-I to joint venture
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    10,268


 





Increase in minority interest
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,063


    )





(Gain) on sale of stock in a
    subsidiary
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,433


    )





Difference of our investment cost
    basis in AirComp and their share of underlying equity of net
    assets of AirComp
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (954


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash paid in connection with
    the joint venture
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Non-cash investing and financing
    transactions in connection with acquisitions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Fair value of net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    (4,867


    )


 


    $


    —


 





Goodwill and other intangibles
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,839


    )


 


 


    —


 





Value of common stock, issued
    



 


 


    1,750


 


 


 


    2,177


 


 


 


    —


 





Value of minority interest
    contribution
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,070


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    1,750


 


 


    $


    (4,459


    )


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisition of the remaining 19%
    of Jens:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Fair value of net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    (813


    )


 


    $


    —


 





Goodwill and other intangibles
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,676


    )


 


 


    —


 





Value of common stock issued
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,434


 


 


 


    —


 





Value of minority interest
    retirement
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (1,945


    )


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    83



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

NOTE 20 — QUARTERLY
    RESULTS (UNAUDITED) (in thousands, except per share
    amounts)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


First



 


 


Second



 


 


Third



 


 


Fourth



 




 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 




 


 


(Restated)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



 





Year 2005



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    19,334


 


 


    $


    23,588


 


 


    $


    28,908


 


 


    $


    33,514


 





Operating income
    



 


 


    2,247


 


 


 


    2,914


 


 


 


    3,524


 


 


 


    4,533


 





Net income
    



 


 


    1,567


 


 


 


    1,769


 


 


 


    1,293


 


 


 


    2,546


 





Preferred stock dividend
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income attributed to common
    shares
    



 


    $


    1,567


 


 


    $


    1,769


 


 


    $


    1,293


 


 


    $


    2,546


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.12


 


 


    $


    0.13


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.15


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.11


 


 


    $


    0.12


 


 


    $


    0.08


 


 


    $


    0.14


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


First



 


 


Second



 


 


Third



 


 


Fourth



 




 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 




 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Year 2004



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    9,661


 


 


    $


    11,422


 


 


    $


    11,906


 


 


    $


    14,737


 





Operating income
    



 


 


    1,030


 


 


 


    1,150


 


 


 


    1,237


 


 


 


    810


 





Net income (loss)
    



 


 


    472


 


 


 


    413


 


 


 


    515


 


 


 


    (512


    )





Preferred stock dividend
    



 


 


    (88


    )


 


 


    (36


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common shares
    



 


    $


    384


 


 


    $


    377


 


 


    $


    515


 


 


    $


    (512


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income (loss) per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.06


 


 


    $


    0.06


 


 


    $


    (0.04


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.08


 


 


    $


    0.05


 


 


    $


    0.05


 


 


    $


    (0.04


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 21 — 


LEGAL
    MATTERS



 

    We are named from time to time in legal proceedings related to
    our activities prior to our bankruptcy in 1988; however, we
    believe that we were discharged from liability for all such
    claims in the bankruptcy and believe the likelihood of a
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.

 

    We are involved in various other legal proceedings in the
    ordinary course of business. The legal proceedings are at
    different stages; however, we believe that the likelihood of
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.

 







NOTE 22 — 


SUBSEQUENT
    EVENTS



 

    In January of 2006, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty Rental Tools, Inc. (“Specialty”) for
    $96.0 million in cash. Specialty, located in Lafayette,
    Louisiana, is engaged in the rental of high quality drill pipe,
    heavy weight spiral drill pipe, tubing work strings, blow-out
    preventors, choke manifolds and various valves and handling
    tools for oil and natural gas drilling. During the nine months
    ended September 30, 2005, Specialty generated aggregate
    revenues of $21.8 million.



    84



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In January of 2006, we closed on a private offering, to
    qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under
    the Securities Act of 1933, of $160.0 million principal
    amount of our 9.0% senior notes due 2014, which we refer to
    as our senior notes. The proceeds of the offering were used to
    fund the acquisition of Specialty, to repay existing debt and
    for general corporate purposes.

 

    In January of 2006, we amended and restated our July 2005 credit
    agreement to increase our borrowing capacity by exchanging the
    existing two year $55.0 million facility for a new four
    year $25.0 million facility. We refer to the July 2005
    credit agreement, as so amended and restated, as our new credit
    agreement. All amounts outstanding under the previous
    $55.0 million credit facility were repaid with proceeds
    from the issuance of our senior notes. The new credit
    agreement’s interest rate is based on a margin over LIBOR
    or the prime rate, and there is a 0.5% fee for the undrawn
    portion. The credit facility is secured by a first priority lien
    on substantially all of our assets.

 

    In January 2006, with proceeds from the sale of our senior notes
    we also prepaid the $3.0 million subordinated seller note
    due to Jens Mortensen, the $548,000 real estate loan and
    $430,000 in various outstanding term and equipment loans.

 

    In February of 2006, David Groshoff resigned from our Board of
    Directors and the Audit Committee. Mr. Groshoff served on
    our Board since 1999, initially under an agreement on behalf of
    the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, which is a client of
    Mr. Groshoff’s employer. That agreement permitted the
    PBGC to appoint a member to our Board so long as the PBGC held a
    minimum number of shares of our stock. The PBGC sold all its
    holdings in our stock in August 2005. As an investment
    management employee of JPMorgan Asset Management, Mr. Groshoff
    is subject to his employer’s policies which generally
    prohibit employees from serving on public company boards of
    directors without a meaningful client interest in such
    companies. In light of the PBGC’s sale of our stock, these
    policies required Mr. Groshoff’s resignation from our
    Board. In March 2006, Robert Nederlander was appointed to the
    Audit Committee to replace Mr. Groshoff.

 

    Through March 13, 2006, we received proceeds of
    approximately $784,000 from the exercise of 313,000 warrants.



    85



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 9.  


CHANGES
    AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL
    DISCLOSURE




 

    On October 5, 2004, our Audit Committee dismissed Gordon,
    Hughes & Banks, LLP as our independent public
    accountant and engaged UHY Mann Frankfort Stein & Lipp
    CPAs, LLP as our independent public accountant to review our
    financial statements beginning with the quarter ending
    September 30, 2004 and to audit our financial statement for
    the year ending December 31, 2004.

 

    Gordon, Hughes & Banks, LLP has not audited our prior
    two fiscal years and accordingly have not expressed an adverse
    opinion or disclaimer of opinion and were not qualified or
    modified as to uncertainty, audit scope or accounting principle.
    During our two prior fiscal years and through October 5,
    2004, there were no disagreements with Gordon, Hughes &
    Banks, LLP on any matter of accounting principles or practices,
    financial statement disclosure, or auditing scope or procedure,
    which disagreements if not resolved to the satisfaction of
    Gordon, Hughes & Banks, LLP, would have caused it to
    make reference to the subject matter of the disagreement in
    connection with its report.

 

    Prior to October 5, 2004, there were no reportable events
    (as defined in
    Regulation S-K
    Item 304(a)(1)(v) of the Securities and Exchange
    Commission) arising out of the services performed by Gordon,
    Hughes & Banks, LLP for us.

 

    Gordon, Hughes & Banks, LLP indicated to us that it
    concurs with the foregoing statements as they relate to Gordon,
    Hughes & Banks, LLP and furnished a letter to the
    Securities and Exchange Commission to this effect. A copy of
    this letter is an exhibit hereto.

 

    Prior to October 5, 2004, we did not consult UHY Mann
    Frankfort Stein & Lipp CPAs, LLP regarding (i) the
    application of accounting principles to a specified transaction
    (completed or proposed), (ii) the type of audit opinion
    that might be rendered on our financial statements, or
    (iii) any matter that was either the subject of a
    disagreement as that term is defined in Item 304(a)(1)(iv)
    of
    Regulation S-K
    of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the related
    instructions to this Item or a reportable event as that term is
    defined in Item 304(a)(1)(v) of
    Regulation S-K
    of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


 







ITEM 9A.  


CONTROLS
    AND PROCEDURES




 

  (a).  Evaluation
    Of Disclosure Controls And Procedures

 

    We maintain disclosure controls and procedures that are designed
    to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our
    reports under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended,
    are recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time
    periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and that
    such information is accumulated and communicated to management,
    including our chief executive officer and chief financial
    officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding
    required disclosures.

 

    Management, including our chief executive officer and our chief
    financial officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of our
    “disclosure controls and procedures” (as defined in
    Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(e)
    and
    15d-15(e))
    as of the end of the period covered by this Report, which we
    refer to as the Evaluation Date.

 

    As disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial
    statements included elsewhere in this report and under the
    caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
    Financial Condition and Results of
    Operations — Restatement,” we understated
    diluted earnings per share due to an incorrect calculation of
    our weighted shares outstanding for the third quarter of 2003,
    for each of the first three quarters of 2004, for the years
    ended December 31, 2003 and 2004 and for the quarter ended
    March 31, 2005. In addition, we understated basic earnings
    per share due to an incorrect calculation of our weighted
    average basic shares outstanding for the quarter ended
    September 30, 2004. Consequently, we have restated our
    financial statements for each of those periods. The incorrect
    calculation resulted from a mathematical error and an improper
    application of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, or
    SFAS, No. 128, Earnings Per Share. Management has concluded
    that the need to restate our financial statements resulted, in
    part, from the lack of sufficient experienced accounting
    personnel, which in turn resulted in a lack of effective control
    over the financial reporting process.



    86



Table of Contents


    As part of our growth strategy over the past five years, we have
    completed acquisitions of several privately-held businesses,
    including closely-held entities. Prior to becoming part of our
    consolidated company, these businesses were not required to
    implement or maintain, and did not implement or maintain, the
    disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls over
    financial reporting that federal law requires of publicly-held
    companies such as ours. We are in the process of creating and
    implementing appropriate disclosure controls and procedures and
    internal controls over financial reporting at each of our
    recently acquired businesses. However, we have not yet completed
    this process and cannot assure you as to when the process will
    be complete.

 

    In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2005, we failed to
    timely file a Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    relating to the issuance of shares of our common stock in
    connection with recent stock option and warrant exercises. The
    current report, which was due to be filed in November 2005, was
    filed in February 2006.

 

    As a result of the issues described above, our management has
    concluded that, as of the Evaluation Date, our disclosure
    controls and procedures were not effective in enabling us to
    record, process, summarize and report information required to be
    included in our SEC filings within the required time period, and
    to ensure that such information is accumulated and communicated
    to our management, including our chief executive officer and
    chief financial accounting officer, to allow timely decisions
    regarding required disclosure.

 

  (b).  Change
    in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.

 

    There were the following changes in our internal control over
    financial reporting (as such term is defined in
    Rules 13a-15(f)
    and
    15d-15(f)
    under the Exchange Act) that occurred during the period covered
    by this report that have materially affected, or are reasonably
    likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
    reporting:

 







 
    • 


    We continued the engagement of an independent internal controls
    consulting firm which is in the process of documenting,
    analyzing, identifying and testing internal controls.


 

 
    • 


    In March 2005, we hired a certified public accountant as our
    financial reporting manager.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2005, we hired a certified public accountant who has
    prior experience as a chief accounting officer of a publicly
    traded company to be our chief accounting officer.


 

 
    • 


    During the year we started the implementation of new accounting
    software and as of December 31, 2005, all but one of our
    segments was utilizing the software.




 

PART III



 







ITEM 10.  


DIRECTORS
    AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT




 

    The information required by Item 10 is incorporated by
    reference from the section entitled “Election of
    Directors” and “Executive Compensation and Other
    Matters” and other relevant portions of the definitive
    Proxy Statement (the “Proxy Statement”) on
    Schedule 14A to be filed by the registrant not later than
    120 days following December 31, 2005.


 







ITEM 11.  


EXECUTIVE
    COMPENSATION




 

    The information required by Item 11 is incorporated by
    reference from the section entitled “Executive Compensation
    and Other Matters” and other relevant portions of the Proxy
    Statement.


 







ITEM 12.  


SECURITY
    OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND
    MANAGEMENT




 

    The information required by Item 12 is incorporated by
    reference from the section entitled “Security Ownership of
    Management and Certain Beneficial Owners” and other
    relevant portions of the Proxy Statement.



    87



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 13.  


CERTAIN
    RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS




 

    The information required by Item 13 is incorporated by
    reference from the section entitled “Certain Relationships
    and Related Transactions” and other relevant portions of
    the Proxy Statement.


 







ITEM 14.  


PRINCIPAL
    ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES




 

    The information required by Item 14 is incorporated by
    reference from the section entitled “Corporate
    Governance” and other relevant portions of the Proxy
    Statement.


 

PART IV



 







ITEM 15.  


EXHIBITS AND
    FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES




 

    (a)  (1) Financial Statements

 

    All financial statements of the Registrant as set forth under
    Item 8 of this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K.

 

    (2) Financial Statement Schedules

 

    Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying
    Accounts

 

    (3) Exhibits

 

    The exhibits listed on the Exhibit index located on page 91
    of this Annual report are filed as part of this
    10-K.



    88



Table of Contents


 

SIGNATURES


 

    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
    Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the registrant has
    duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
    undersigned, thereunto duly authorized on March 22, 2006.

 

/s/  MUNAWAR H. HIDAYATALLAH



Munawar H. Hidayatallah




Chief Executive Officer and Chairman

 

    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
    Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has
    been signed on the date indicated by the following persons on
    behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  




Name



 



Title



 



Date




 




/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH
Munawar
    H. Hidayatallah
    


 


Chairman and Chief Executive
    Officer (Principle Executive Officer)
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ
Victor
    M. Perez
    


 


Chief Financial Officer
    (Principal Financial Officer)
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  BRUCE
    SAUERS
Bruce
    Sauers
    


 


Chief Accounting Officer
    (Principal Accounting Officer)
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JENS
    H. MORTENSEN
Jens
    H. Mortensen
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  VICTOR
    F. GERMACK
Victor
    F. Germack
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  LEONARD
    TOBOROFF
Leonard
    Toboroff
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JOHN
    E. MCCONNAUGHY, JR.
John
    E. McConnaughy, Jr. 
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  ROBERT
    E. NEDERLANDER
Robert
    E. Nederlander
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JEFFREY
    R. FREEDMAN
Jeffrey
    R. Freedman
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  THOMAS
    E. KELLEY
Thomas
    E. Kelley
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  THOMAS
    O. WHITENER, JR.
Thomas
    O. Whitener, Jr. 
    


 


Director
    


 


March 22, 2006
    







    89



Table of Contents
 







(2)  


Financial
    Statement Schedule:



 

Schedule II — Valuation
    and Qualifying Accounts

 

Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc.
    Valuation and Qualifying Accounts

 




  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  





 


 


 


 


 


Additions



 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


Balance at



 


 


Charged to



 


 


 


 


 


Balance at



 






 


 


Beginning



 


 


Costs and



 


 


 


 


 


End of



 







Description



 


of Period


 


 


Expense


 


 


Deductions


 


 


Period


 






 


 


(In thousands)


 





 







Year Ended December 31,
    2005:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







Allowance for doubtful accounts
    



 


 


    265


 


 


 


    219


 


 


 


    (101


    )


 


 


    383


 







Deferred tax assets valuation
    allowance
    



 


 


    30,367


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,236


    )


 


 


    27,131


 







Year Ended December 31,
    2004:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







Allowance for doubtful accounts
    



 


 


    168


 


 


 


    104


 


 


 


    (7


    )


 


 


    265


 







Deferred tax assets valuation
    allowance
    



 


 


    38,475


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,108


    )


 


 


    30,367


 







Year Ended December 31,
    2003:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







Allowance for doubtful accounts
    



 


 


    32


 


 


 


    136


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    168


 







Deferred tax assets valuation
    allowance
    



 


 


    37,533


 


 


 


    942


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    38,475


 








    90


Table of Contents

EXHIBIT INDEX

 




  
  
  
  
  






Exhibit



 



Description






 






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    2


    .1


 


First Amended Disclosure Statement
    pursuant to Section 1125 of the Bankruptcy Code, dated
    September 14, 1988, which includes the First Amended and
    Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated September 14,
    1988 (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    2


    .2


 


Agreement and Plan of Merger dated
    as of May 9, 2001 by and among Registrant, Allis-Chalmers
    Acquisition Corp. and OilQuip Rentals, Inc. (incorporated by
    reference to Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed May  15, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    2


    .3


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and between Registrant and Jens H.
    Mortensen, Jr. (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    2


    .4


 


Shareholders Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and among Jens’ Oilfield Service,
    Inc., a Texas corporation, Jens H. Mortensen, Jr., and
    Registrant (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    2


    .5


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and among Registrant, Energy Spectrum
    Partners LP, and Strata Directional Technology, Inc.
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    2


    .6


 


Joint Venture Agreement dated
    June 27, 2003 by and between Mountain Compressed Air, Inc.
    and M-I L.L.C. (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed July 16, 2003).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    3


    .1


 


Amended and Restated Certificate
    of Incorporation of Registrant (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    3


    .2


 


Certificate of Designation,
    Preferences and Rights of the Series A 10% Cumulative
    Convertible Preferred Stock ($.01 Par Value) of
    Registrant (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    3


    .3


 


Amended and Restated By-laws of
    Registrant (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Annual Report of
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    3


    .4


 


Certificate of Amendment of
    Certificate of Incorporation filed with the Delaware Secretary
    of State on June 9, 2004 (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    3


    .5


 


Certificate of Amendment of
    Certificate of Incorporation filed with the Delaware Secretary
    of State on January 5, 2005 (incorporated by reference to
    the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed January 11, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .1


 


Specimen Stock Certificate of
    Common Stock of Registrant (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .2


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated as of March 31, 1999, by and between Allis-Chalmers
    Corporation and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
    (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Quarterly
    Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .3


 


Option Agreement dated
    October 15, 2001 by and between Registrant and Leonard
    Toboroff (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended September 30, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .4


 


Warrant Purchase Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and between Allis-Chalmers Corporation
    and Wells Fargo Energy Capital, Inc., including form of warrant
    (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .5*


 


2003 Incentive Stock Plan
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .6*


 


Form of Option Certificate issued
    pursuant to 2003 Incentive Stock Plan (incorporated by reference
    to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






    91


Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  






Exhibit



 



Description






 






 


    4


    .7


 


Form of warrant issued to
    Investors pursuant to Stock and Warrant Purchase Agreement dated
    April 2, 2004 by and among Registrant and Donald Engel,
    Christopher Engel The Engel Defined Benefit plan, RER Corp. and
    Leonard Toboroff (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .8


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated April 2, 2004 by and between Registrant and the
    Stockholder signatories thereto (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .9


 


Warrant dated May 19, 2004,
    issued to Jeffrey R. Freedman (incorporated by reference to the
    Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .10


 


Amendment to 2003 Stock Option
    Plan (incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report of
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended September 30, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .11


 


Indenture dated as of
    January 18, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as
    trustee (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 13, 2006).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    4


    .12


 


Form of 9.0% Senior Note due
    2014 (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated January 13, 2006).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    9


    .1


 


Shareholders Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and among Registrant and the
    stockholder and warrant holder signatories thereto (incorporated
    by reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .1


 


Amended and Restated Retiree
    Health Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and Wells Fargo Bank (incorporated by
    reference to
    Exhibit C-1
    of the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization
    dated September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .2


 


Amended and Restated Retiree
    Health Trust Agreement dated September 18, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and Firstar Trust Company (incorporated by
    reference to
    Exhibit C-2
    of the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization
    dated September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .3


 


Reorganization
    Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and John T. Grigsby, Jr., Trustee
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit D of the First
    Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
    September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .4


 


Product Liability
    Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and Bruce W. Strausberg, Trustee
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit E of the First
    Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
    September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .5*


 


Allis-Chalmers Savings Plan
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .6*


 


Allis-Chalmers Consolidated
    Pension Plan (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 1988).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .7


 


Agreement dated as of
    March 31, 1999 by and between Registrant and the Pension
    Benefit Guaranty Corporation (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .8


 


Letter Agreement dated May 9,
    2001 by and between Registrant and the Pension Benefit Guarantee
    Corporation (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on May 15, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .9


 


Termination Agreement dated
    May 9, 2001 by and between Registrant, the Pension Benefit
    Guarantee Corporation and others (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 15, 2002).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .10*


 


Option Agreement dated
    October 15, 2001 by and between Registrant and Leonard
    Toboroff (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended September 30, 2001).
    






 


 


 


 


 





    92


Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  






Exhibit



 



Description






 






 


    10


    .11*


 


Employment Agreement dated
    July 1, 2003 by and between AirComp LLC and Terry Keane
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Current Report
    on
    Form 8-K
    filed July 16, 2003).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .12


 


Letter Agreement dated
    February 13, 2004 by and between Registrant and Morgan
    Joseph & Co., Inc. (incorporated by reference to the
    Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .13*


 


Employment Agreement dated as of
    April 1, 2004 between Registrant and Munawar H.
    Hidayatallah (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .14*


 


Employment Agreement dated as of
    April 1, 2004 between Registrant and David Wilde
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Quarterly Report
    on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .15


 


Fifth Amendment to Credit
    Agreement dated as of April 6, 2004 by and between Strata
    Directional Technology, Inc., and Wells Fargo Credit Inc.
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Quarterly Report
    on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .16


 


Third Amendment to Credit
    Agreement dated as of April 6, 2004 by and between
    Jens’ Oilfield Service, Inc. and Wells Fargo Credit Inc.
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Quarterly Report
    on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .17


 


Letter Agreement dated
    June 8, 2004 by and between the Registrant and Morgan
    Keegan & Company, Inc. (incorporated by reference to
    the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .18*


 


Employment Agreement dated
    July 26, 2004 by and between the Registrant and Victor M.
    Perez (incorporated by reference to the Registration Statement
    on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .19


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    August 10, 2004 (incorporated by reference to the
    Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .20


 


Amendment to Stock Purchase
    Agreement dated August 10, 2004 (incorporated by reference
    to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .21


 


Letter Agreement relating to Stock
    Purchase Agreement dated August 5, 2004 (incorporated by
    reference to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .22


 


Addendum to Stock Purchase
    Agreement dated September 24, 2004 (incorporated by
    reference to Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 30, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .23*


 


Employment Agreement dated
    October 11, 2004, between the Registrant and Theodore F.
    Pound III (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 15, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .24


 


Asset Purchase Agreement dated
    November 10, 2004 by and among AirComp LLC, a Delaware
    limited liability company, Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc.,
    a Texas corporation, and Marquis Bit Co., L.L.C., a New Mexico
    limited liability company, Greg Hawley and Tammy Hawley,
    residents of Texas and Clay Wilson and Linda Wilson, residents
    of New Mexico (incorporated by reference to the Current Report
    on
    Form 8-K
    filed on November 15, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .25


 


Amended and Restated Credit
    Agreement dated as of December 7, 2004, between AirComp LLC
    and Wells Fargo Bank, NA (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 13, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .26


 


Purchase Agreement and related
    Agreements by and among Allis-Chalmers Corporation, Chevron USA,
    Inc., Dale Redman and others dated December 10, 2004
    (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 16, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .27


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    April 1, 2005, by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    Thomas Whittington, Sr., Werlyn R. Bourgeois and SAM and D,
    LLC. (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on April 5, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .28


 


Stock Purchase Agreement effective
    May 1, 2005, by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    Wesley J. Mahone, Mike T. Wilhite, Andrew D. Mills and Tim
    Williams (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 6, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 





    93


Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  






Exhibit



 



Description






 






 


    10


    .29


 


Purchase Agreement dated
    July 11, 2005 among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., Mountain
    Compressed Air, Inc. and M-I, L.L.C. (incorporated by reference
    to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 15, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .30


 


Asset Purchase Agreement dated
    July 11, 2005 between AirComp LLC, W.T. Enterprises, Inc.
    and William M. Watts (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 15, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .31


 


First Amendment to Stockholder
    Agreement by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and the
    Stockholders named therein (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 5, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .32


 


Asset Purchase Agreement by and
    between Patterson Services, Inc. and Allis-Chalmers Tubular
    Services, Inc. (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 8, 2005).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .33


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated as
    of December 20, 2005 between Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and
    Joe Van Matre.
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .34


 


Purchase Agreement dated as of
    January 12, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc,
    the Guarantors named therein and the Initial Purchasers named
    therein (incorporated by reference to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .35


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc., the Guarantors named therein and the Initial
    Purchasers named therein (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    10


    .36


 


Amended and Restated Credit
    Agreement dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., as borrower, Royal bank of Canada,
    as administrative agent and Collateral Agent, RBC Capital
    Markets, as lead arranger and sole bookrunner, and the lenders
    party thereto (incorporated by reference to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    14


    .1


 


Code of Ethics (incorporated by
    reference to the
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 1, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    16


    .1


 


Letter from Gordon
    Hughes & Banks LLP dated October 5, 2004, to the
    Securities and Exchange Commission (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 6, 2004).
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    21


    .1


 


Subsidiaries of Registrant.
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    31


    .1


 


Certification of Chief Executive
    Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
    of 2002.
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    31


    .2


 


Certification of Chief Financial
    Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
    of 2002.
    






 


 


 


 


 






 






 


 






 


    32


    .1


 


Certification of the Chief
    Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer pursuant to
    18 U.S.C. 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of
    the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
    






 

 








    * 


    Compensation Plan or Agreement



    94





EX-10.33
2
h34263exv10w33.htm
STOCK PURCHASE AGREEMENT



exv10w33



 

Exhibit 10.33

STOCK PURCHASE AGREEMENT

     This Stock Purchase Agreement (“Agreement”) is made as of December 20, 2005, by and between
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Buyer”) and Joe Van Matre, an individual
resident in Lafayette, Louisiana (“Seller”).

R E C I T A L S

     Seller desires to sell, and Buyer desires to purchase, all of the issued and outstanding
shares (“Shares”) of capital stock of Specialty Rental Tools Inc., a Louisiana corporation
(“Company”), for the consideration and on the terms set forth in this Agreement.

AGREEMENT

     The parties, intending to be legally bound, agree as follows:

1. DEFINITIONS

     For purposes of this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings specified or referred to
in this Section 1:

“Applicable Contract”—any Contract (a) under which Company has or may
acquire any rights, (b) under which Company has or may become subject to any
obligation or liability, or (c) by which Company or any of the assets owned or used
by it is or may become bound.

“Balance Sheet”—as defined in Section 3.4.

“Best Efforts”—the efforts that a prudent Person desirous of achieving a
result would use in similar circumstances to ensure that such result is achieved as
expeditiously as possible; provided, however, that an obligation to use Best
Efforts under this Agreement does not require the Person subject to that obligation
to take actions that would result in a materially adverse change in the benefits to
such Person of this Agreement and the Contemplated Transactions.

“Breach”—a “Breach” of a representation, warranty, covenant, obligation, or
other provision of this Agreement or any instrument delivered pursuant to this
Agreement will be deemed to have occurred if there is or has been (a) any inaccuracy
in or breach of, or any failure to perform or comply with, such representation,
warranty, covenant, obligation, or other provision, or (b) any valid claim (by any
Person) or other occurrence or circumstance that is or was inconsistent with such
representation, warranty, covenant, obligation, or other provision, and the term
“Breach” means any such inaccuracy, breach, failure, claim, occurrence, or
circumstance.

1



 

“Breakup Fee”—as defined in Section 7.8.

“Buyer”—as defined in the first paragraph of this Agreement.

“Closing”—as defined in Section 2.3.

“Closing Date”—the date and time as of which the Closing actually takes
place.

“Code”—the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.

“Company”—as defined in the Recitals of this Agreement.

“Consent”—any approval, consent, ratification, waiver, or other
authorization (including any Governmental Authorization).

“Contemplated Transactions”—all of the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement, including:

     (a) the sale of the Shares by Seller to Buyer;

     (b) the execution, delivery, and performance of the Employment Agreement, Lease
Agreement and the Seller’s Release;

     (c) the performance by Buyer and Seller of their respective covenants and
obligations under this Agreement; and

     (d) Buyer’s acquisition and ownership of the Shares and exercise of control
over the Company.

“Contract”—any agreement, contract, obligation, promise, or undertaking
(whether written or oral and whether express or implied) that is legally binding.

“Contribution”—as defined in Section 2.7.

“Damages”—as defined in Section 10.2.

“Disclosure Letter”—the disclosure letter delivered by Seller to Buyer
concurrently with the execution and delivery of this Agreement.

“Employment Agreement”—as defined in Section 2.4(a)(iii).

“Encumbrance”—any charge, claim, community property interest, condition,
equitable interest, lien, option, pledge, security interest, right of first refusal,
or restriction of any kind, including any restriction on use, voting, transfer,
receipt of income, or exercise of any other attribute of ownership.

2



 

“Environment”—soil, land surface or subsurface strata, surface waters
(including navigable waters, ocean waters, streams, ponds, drainage basins, and
wetlands), groundwaters, drinking water supply, stream sediments, ambient air
(including indoor air), plant and animal life, and any other environmental medium or
natural resource.

“Environmental, Health, and Safety Liabilities”—any cost, damages, expense,
liability, obligation, or other responsibility arising from or under Environmental
Law or Occupational Safety and Health Law and consisting of or relating to:

(a) any environmental, health, or safety matters or conditions (including
on-site or off-site contamination, occupational safety and health, and
regulation of chemical substances or products);

(b) fines, penalties, judgments, awards, settlements, legal or
administrative proceedings, damages, losses, claims, demands and response,
investigative, remedial, or inspection costs and expenses arising under
Environmental Law or Occupational Safety and Health Law;

(c) financial responsibility under Environmental Law or Occupational Safety
and Health Law for cleanup costs or corrective action, including any
investigation, cleanup, removal, containment, or other remediation or
response actions (“Cleanup”) required by applicable Environmental Law or
Occupational Safety and Health Law (whether or not such Cleanup has been
required or requested by any Governmental Body or any other Person) and for
any natural resource damages; or

(d) any other compliance, corrective, investigative, or remedial measures
required under Environmental Law or Occupational Safety and Health Law.

The terms “removal,” “remedial,” and “response action,” include the types of
activities covered by the United States Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., as amended (“CERCLA”).

“Environmental Law”—any Legal Requirement that requires or relates to:

(a) advising appropriate authorities, employees, and the public of intended
or actual releases of pollutants or hazardous substances or materials,
violations of discharge limits, or other prohibitions and of the
commencements of activities, such as resource extraction or construction,
that could have significant impact on the Environment;

(b) preventing or reducing to acceptable levels the release of pollutants or
hazardous substances or materials into the Environment;

3



 

(c) reducing the quantities, preventing the release, or minimizing the
hazardous characteristics of wastes that are generated;

(d) assuring that products are designed, formulated, packaged, and used so
that they do not present unreasonable risks to human health or the
Environment when used or disposed of;

(e) protecting resources, species, or ecological amenities;

(f) reducing to acceptable levels the risks inherent in the transportation
of hazardous substances, pollutants, oil, or other potentially harmful
substances;

(g) cleaning up pollutants that have been released, preventing the threat of
release, or paying the costs of such clean up or prevention; or

(h) making responsible parties pay private parties, or groups of them, for
damages done to their health or the Environment, or permitting
self-appointed representatives of the public interest to recover for
injuries done to public assets.

“ERISA”—the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 or any
successor law, and regulations and rules issued pursuant to that Act or any
successor law.

“Facilities”—any real property, leaseholds, or other interests currently or
formerly owned or operated by the Company and any buildings, plants, structures, or
equipment (including motor vehicles, tank cars, and rolling stock) currently or
formerly owned or operated by the Company.

“GAAP”—generally accepted United States accounting principles, applied on a
basis consistent with the basis on which the Balance Sheet and the other financial
statements referred to in Section 3.4(b) were prepared.

“Governmental Authorization”—any approval, consent, license, permit,
waiver, or other authorization issued, granted, given, or otherwise made available
by or under the authority of any Governmental Body or pursuant to any Legal
Requirement.

“Governmental Body”—any:

(a) nation, state, county, city, town, village, district, or other
jurisdiction of any nature;

(b) federal, state, local, municipal, foreign, or other government;

4



 

(c) governmental or quasi-governmental authority of any nature (including
any governmental agency, branch, department, official, or entity and any
court or other tribunal);

(d) multi-national organization or body; or

(e) body exercising, or entitled to exercise, any administrative, executive,
judicial, legislative, police, regulatory, or taxing authority or power of
any nature.

“Hazardous Activity”—the distribution, generation, handling, importing,
management, manufacturing, processing, production, refinement, Release, storage,
transfer, transportation, treatment, or use (including any withdrawal or other use
of groundwater) of Hazardous Materials in, on, under, about, or from the Facilities
or any part thereof into the Environment, and any other act, business, operation, or
thing that increases the danger, or risk of danger, or poses an unreasonable risk of
harm to persons or property on or off the Facilities, or that may affect the value
of the Facilities or the Company.

“Hazardous Materials”—any waste or other substance that is listed, defined,
designated, or classified as, or otherwise determined to be, hazardous, radioactive,
or toxic or a pollutant or a contaminant under or pursuant to any Environmental Law,
including any admixture or solution thereof, and specifically including petroleum
and all derivatives thereof or synthetic substitutes therefor and asbestos or
asbestos-containing materials.

“HSR Act”—the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 or any
successor law, and regulations and rules issued pursuant to that Act or any
successor law.

“Intellectual Property Assets” —as defined in Section 3.22.

“Interim Balance Sheet”—as defined in Section 3.4.

“IRC”—the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or any successor law, and
regulations issued by the IRS pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code or any successor
law.

“IRS”—the United States Internal Revenue Service or any successor agency,
and, to the extent relevant, the United States Department of the Treasury.

“Knowledge”—an individual will be deemed to have “Knowledge” of a
particular fact or other matter if such individual is actually aware of such fact or
other matter.;

A Person (other than an individual) will be deemed to have “Knowledge” of a
particular fact or other matter if any individual who is serving, or who has at any
time

5



 

served, as a director, officer, partner, executor, or trustee of such Person (or in
any similar capacity) has, or at any time had, Knowledge of such fact or other
matter.

“Lease Agreement”—as defined in Section 2.4(a)(v).

“Legal Requirement”—any federal, state, local, municipal, foreign,
international, multinational, or other administrative order, constitution, law,
ordinance, principle of common law, regulation, statute, or treaty.

“Make Whole Amount”—as defined in Section 2.6

“Occupational Safety and Health Law”—any Legal Requirement designed to
provide safe and healthful working conditions and to reduce occupational safety and
health hazards, and any program, whether governmental or private (including those
promulgated or sponsored by industry associations and insurance companies), designed
to provide safe and healthful working conditions.

“Order”—any award, decision, injunction, judgment, order, ruling, subpoena,
or verdict entered, issued, made, or rendered by any court, administrative agency,
or other Governmental Body or by any arbitrator.

“Ordinary Course of Business”—an action taken by a Person will be deemed to
have been taken in the “Ordinary Course of Business” only if:

(a) such action is consistent with the past practices of such Person and is
taken in the ordinary course of the normal day-to-day operations of such
Person;

(b) such action is not required to be authorized by the board of directors
of such Person (or by any Person or group of Persons exercising similar
authority); and

(c) such action is similar in nature and magnitude to actions customarily
taken, without any authorization by the board of directors (or by any Person
or group of Persons exercising similar authority), in the ordinary course of
the normal day-to-day operations of other Persons that are in the same line
of business as such Person.

“Organizational Documents”—(a) the articles or certificate of incorporation
and the bylaws of a corporation; (b) the partnership agreement and any statement of
partnership of a general partnership; (c) the limited partnership agreement and the
certificate of limited partnership of a limited partnership; (d) any charter or
similar document adopted or filed in connection with the creation, formation, or
organization of a Person; and (e) any amendment to any of the foregoing.

6



 

“Person”—any individual, corporation (including any non-profit
corporation), general or limited partnership, limited liability company, joint
venture, estate, trust, association, organization, labor union, or other entity or
Governmental Body.

“Plan”—as defined in Section 3.13.

“Proceeding”—any action, arbitration, audit, hearing, investigation,
litigation, or suit (whether civil, criminal, administrative, investigative, or
informal) commenced, brought, conducted, or heard by or before, or otherwise
involving, any Governmental Body or arbitrator.

“Related Person”—with respect to a particular individual:

(a) each other member of such individual’s Family;

(b) any Person that is directly or indirectly controlled by such individual
or one or more members of such individual’s Family;

(c) any Person in which such individual or members of such individual’s
Family hold (individually or in the aggregate) a Material Interest; and

(d) any Person with respect to which such individual or one or more members
of such individual’s Family serves as a director, officer, partner,
executor, or trustee (or in a similar capacity).

With respect to a specified Person other than an individual:

(a) any Person that directly or indirectly controls, is directly or
indirectly controlled by, or is directly or indirectly under common control
with such specified Person;

(b) any Person that holds a Material Interest in such specified Person;

(c) each Person that serves as a director, officer, partner, executor, or
trustee of such specified Person (or in a similar capacity);

(d) any Person in which such specified Person holds a Material Interest;

(e) any Person with respect to which such specified Person serves as a
general partner or a trustee (or in a similar capacity); and

(f) any Related Person of any individual described in clause (b) or (c).

For purposes of this definition, (a) the “Family” of an individual includes (i) the
individual, (ii) the individual’s spouse, (iii) any other natural person who is
related to

7



 

the individual or the individual’s spouse within the second degree, and (iv) any
other natural person who resides with such individual, and (b) “Material Interest”
means direct or indirect beneficial ownership (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934) of voting securities or other voting interests
representing at least 10% of the outstanding voting power of a Person or equity
securities or other equity interests representing at least 10% of the outstanding
equity securities or equity interests in a Person.

“Release”—any spilling, leaking, emitting, discharging, depositing,
escaping, leaching, dumping, or other releasing into the Environment, whether
intentional or unintentional.

“Representative”—with respect to a particular Person, any director,
officer, employee, agent, consultant, advisor, or other representative of such
Person, including legal counsel, accountants, and financial advisors.

“Section 338(h)(10) Elections”—as defined in Section 2.5.

“Securities Act”—the Securities Act of 1933 or any successor law, and
regulations and rules issued pursuant to that Act or any successor law.

“Seller”—as defined in the first paragraph of this Agreement.

“Seller’s Release”—as defined in Section 2.4.

“Shares”—as defined in the Recitals of this Agreement.

“Subsidiary”—with respect to any Person (the “Owner”), any corporation or
other Person of which securities or other interests having the power to elect a
majority of that corporation’s or other Person’s board of directors or similar
governing body, or otherwise having the power to direct the business and policies of
that corporation or other Person (other than securities or other interests having
such power only upon the happening of a contingency that has not occurred) are held
by the Owner or one or more of its Subsidiaries; when used without reference to a
particular Person, “Subsidiary” means a Subsidiary of the Company.

“Tax”—any income, gross receipts, license, payroll, employment, excise,
severance, stamp, occupation, premium, property, environmental, windfall profit,
customs, vehicle, airplane, boat, vessel or other title or registration, capital
stock, franchise, employees’ income withholding, foreign or domestic withholding,
social security, unemployment, disability, real property, personal property, sales,
use, transfer, value added, alternative, add-on minimum and other tax, fee,
assessment, levy, tariff, charge or duty of any kind whatsoever and any interest,
penalty, addition or additional amount thereon imposed, assessed or collected by or
under the authority of

8



 

any Governmental Body or payable under any tax-sharing agreement or any other
Contract.

“Tax Return”—any return (including any information return), report,
statement, schedule, notice, form, or other document or information filed with or
submitted to, or required to be filed with or submitted to, any Governmental Body in
connection with the determination, assessment, collection, or payment of any Tax or
in connection with the administration, implementation, or enforcement of or
compliance with any Legal Requirement relating to any Tax.

“Threat of Release”—a substantial likelihood of a Release that may require
action in order to prevent or mitigate damage to the Environment that may result
from such Release.

“Threatened”—a claim, Proceeding, dispute, action, or other matter will be
deemed to have been “Threatened” if any demand or statement has been made (orally or
in writing) or any notice has been given (orally or in writing), or if any other
event has occurred or any other circumstances exist, that would lead a prudent
Person to conclude that such a claim, Proceeding, dispute, action, or other matter
is likely to be asserted, commenced, taken, or otherwise pursued in the future.

2. SALE AND TRANSFER OF SHARES; CLOSING

2.1 SHARES

            Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, at the Closing, Seller will sell and
transfer the Shares to Buyer, and Buyer will purchase the Shares from Seller.

2.2 PURCHASE PRICE

            The purchase price (the “Purchase Price”) for the Shares will be $83,600,000 which includes
the Make Whole Amount which represents additional Purchase Price.

2.3 CLOSING

            The purchase and sale (the “Closing”) provided for in this Agreement will take place at the
offices of Buyer at 5075 Westheimer, Suite 890, Houston, Texas 77056 at 10:00 a.m. (local time) on
the earliest date following January 2, 2006, and when all the conditions precedent of Seller and
Buyer as described in Sections 7 and 8 of this Agreement have been satisfied or at such other time
and place as the parties may agree. Subject to the provisions of Section 9, failure to consummate
the purchase and sale provided for in this Agreement on the date and time and at the place
determined pursuant to this Section 2.3 will not result in the termination of this Agreement and
will not relieve any party of any obligation under this Agreement.

9



 

2.4 CLOSING OBLIGATIONS

            At the Closing:

            (a) Seller will deliver to Buyer:

(i) certificates representing the Shares, duly endorsed (or accompanied by
duly executed stock powers) for transfer to Buyer;

(ii) release in the form of Exhibit 2.4(a)(ii) executed by Seller
(collectively, “Seller’s Release”);

(iii) employment agreement in the form of Exhibit 2.4(a)(iii), executed by
Seller (“Employment Agreement”);

(iv) a certificate executed by Seller representing and warranting to Buyer
that each of Seller’s representations and warranties in this Agreement was
accurate in all respects as of the date of this Agreement and is accurate in
all respects as of the Closing Date as if made on the Closing Date (giving
full effect to any supplements to the Disclosure Letter that were delivered
by Seller to Buyer prior to the Closing Date in accordance with Section
5.5);

(v) a lease agreement in the form of Exhibit 2.4(a)(v) executed by Seller on
the real property and buildings operated by the Company in Broussard,
Louisiana (“Lease Agreement”); and

(vi) an affidavit stating that the Seller’s United States taxpayer
identification number and that the Seller is not a foreign person pursuant
to Section 1445(b)(2) of the Code.

            (b) Buyer will deliver to Seller:

(i) the amount of $83,600,000 by wire transfer to an account specified by
Seller;

(ii) a certificate executed by Buyer representing and warranting to Seller
that each of Buyer’s representations in this Agreement was accurate in all
respects as of the date of this Agreement and is accurate in all respects as
of the Closing Date as if made on the Closing Date;

(iii)the Employment Agreement executed by Buyer; and

(iv)the Lease Agreement executed by the Company.

10



 

2.5 SECTION 338 (h)(10) ELECTION

            If Buyer decides in its sole discretion to make a Section 338(h)(10) Election pursuant to the
Code with respect to the sale and purchase of Shares under this Agreement, Seller and Buyer agree
to join in making the election under Section 338(h)(10) (and any corresponding elections under
state, local or foreign tax law) (collectively, the “Section 338(h)(10) Elections”) with respect to
the purchase and sale of the Shares of the Company to Buyer.

2.6 ADDITIONAL PURCHASE PRICE FOR 338(h)(10) ELECTIONS

            In making the Section 338(h)(10) Elections, Buyer will include in payment to Seller an amount
of $6,000,000 as additional Purchase Price (“Make Whole Amount”). The Make Whole Amount represents
incremental Taxes payable by Seller as a result of the Section 338(h)(10) Elections and additional
Taxes payable by Seller as a result of consideration paid to Seller for such incremental Taxes
payable. The Make Whole Amount shall be treated as additional Purchase Price by both Seller and
Buyer in accordance with Section 5.9(d). Following the Section 338(h)(10) Elections, in the event
that the Make Whole Amount is less than the incremental Taxes incurred by Seller as a result of the
Section 338(h)(10) Elections, then Buyer will pay to Seller within ten days following
determination, such additional incremental Taxes (and additional Taxes as a result of consideration
paid). Following the Section 338(h)(10) Elections, in the event that the Make Whole Amount is more
than the incremental Taxes payable by Seller (and additional Taxes as a result of consideration
paid) as a result of the Section 338(h)(10) Elections, then Seller shall pay to Buyer the
difference in such amount and the Make Whole Amount within ten days of such determination.

2.7 CONTRIBUTION TO COMPANY

            As additional consideration for this Agreement, Buyer and Seller have agreed that, at Closing,
Buyer shall contribute to the Company $12,400,000 less an amount equal to Company’s cash on hand on
the Closing Date (“Contribution”) for the payment on the Closing Date by the Company of bonuses and
commissions to certain employees and non-employees of the Company. The Contribution by Buyer
together with the cash of the Company on hand on the Closing Date shall be used exclusively for the
payment by the Company of said bonuses and commissions in such amounts, the total of which shall
not exceed $12,400,000, and to the individuals selected by Seller in his sole discretion.

3. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF SELLER

Seller represents and warrants to Buyer as follows:

3.1 ORGANIZATION AND GOOD STANDING

            (a) Part 3.1 of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list for the Company of
its name, its jurisdiction of incorporation, other jurisdictions in which it is authorized to do
business, and its capitalization (including the identity of each stockholder and the number of
shares held by each). The Company is a corporation duly organized, validly existing, and in good
standing

11



 

under the laws of its jurisdiction of incorporation, with full corporate power and authority
to conduct its business as it is now being conducted, to own or use the properties and assets that
it purports to own or use, and to perform all its obligations under Applicable Contracts. The
Company is duly qualified to do business as a foreign corporation and is in good standing under the
laws of each state or other jurisdiction in which either the ownership or use of the properties
owned or used by it, or the nature of the activities conducted by it, requires such qualification.

            (b) Seller has delivered to Buyer copies of the Organizational Documents of the Company, as
currently in effect.

3.2 AUTHORITY; NO CONFLICT

          (a) This Agreement constitutes the legal, valid, and binding obligation of Seller, enforceable
against Seller in accordance with its terms. Upon the execution and delivery by Seller of the
Employment Agreement and the Seller’s Release (collectively, the “Seller’s Closing Documents”), the
Seller’ Closing Documents will constitute the legal, valid, and binding obligations of Seller,
enforceable against Seller in accordance with their respective terms. Seller has the absolute and
unrestricted right, power, authority, and capacity to execute and deliver this Agreement and the
Seller’s Closing Documents and to perform their obligations under this Agreement and the Seller’s
Closing Documents.

          (b) Except as set forth in Part 3.2 of the Disclosure Letter, neither the execution and
delivery of this Agreement nor the consummation or performance of any of the Contemplated
Transactions will, directly or indirectly (with or without notice or lapse of time):

     (i) contravene, conflict with, or result in a violation of (A) any provision of
the Organizational Documents of the Company, or (B) any resolution adopted by the
board of directors or the stockholders of the Company;

     (ii) contravene, conflict with, or result in a violation of, or give any
Governmental Body or other Person the right to challenge any of the Contemplated
Transactions or to exercise any remedy or obtain any relief under, any Legal
Requirement or any Order to which the Company or Seller, or any of the assets owned
or used by the Company, may be subject;

     (iii) contravene, conflict with, or result in a violation of any of the terms
or requirements of, or give any Governmental Body the right to revoke, withdraw,
suspend, cancel, terminate, or modify, any Governmental Authorization that is held
by the Company or that otherwise relates to the business of, or any of the assets
owned or used by the Company;

     (iv) cause Buyer or the Company to become subject to, or to become liable for
the payment of, any Tax other than as a result of the Company no longer being a
Subchapter S corporation;

12



 

     (v) cause any of the assets owned by the Company to be reassessed or revalued
by any taxing authority or other Governmental Body;

     (vi) contravene, conflict with, or result in a violation or breach of any
provision of, or give any Person the right to declare a default or exercise any
remedy under, or to accelerate the maturity or performance of, or to cancel,
terminate, or modify, any Applicable Contract; or

     (vii) result in the imposition or creation of any Encumbrance upon or with
respect to any of the assets owned or used by the Company.

Except as set forth in Part 3.2 of the Disclosure Letter, neither Seller or the Company is or will
be required to give any notice to or obtain any Consent from any Person in connection with the
execution and delivery of this Agreement or the consummation or performance of any of the
Contemplated Transactions.

3.3 CAPITALIZATION

               The authorized equity securities of the Company consist of 10,000 shares of common stock, no
par value, of which 225 shares are issued and outstanding and constitute the Shares. Seller is and
will be on the Closing Date the record and beneficial owner and holder of all the Shares, free and
clear of all Encumbrances. No legend or other reference to any purported Encumbrance appears upon
any certificate representing equity securities of Company. All of the outstanding equity securities
of the Company have been duly authorized and validly issued and are fully paid and nonassessable.
There are no Contracts relating to the issuance, sale, or transfer of any equity securities or
other securities of the Company. None of the outstanding equity securities or other securities of
the Company was issued in violation of the Securities Act or any other Legal Requirement. The
Company does not own, or have any Contract to acquire, any equity securities or other securities of
any Person or any direct or indirect equity or ownership interest in any other business.

3.4 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

               Seller has delivered to Buyer: (a) audited consolidated balance sheets of the Company as at
December 31 in each of the years 2002 through 2003, and the related audited consolidated statements
of income, changes in stockholders’ equity, and cash flow for each of the fiscal years then ended,
together with the report thereon of UHY Mann Frankfort Stein & Lipp, independent certified public
accountants, (b) an audited consolidated balance sheet of the Company as at December 31, 2004
(including the notes thereto, the “Balance Sheet”), and the related consolidated statements of
income, changes in stockholders’ equity, and cash flow for the fiscal year then ended, together
with the report thereon of UHY Mann Frankfort & Stein, independent certified public accountants,
and (c) an audited consolidated balance sheet of the Company as at September 30, 2005 (the “Interim
Balance Sheet”) and the related audited consolidated statements of income, changes in stockholders’
equity, and cash flow for the 9 months then ended, including in each case the notes thereto
together with the report thereon of UHY Mann Frankfort Stein & Lipp, independent certified public

13



 

accountants. Such financial statements and notes fairly present the financial condition and
the results of operations, changes in stockholders’ equity, and cash flow of the Company as at the
respective dates of and for the periods referred to in such financial statements, all in accordance
with GAAP, subject, in the case of interim financial statements, to normal recurring year-end
adjustments (the effect of which will not, individually or in the aggregate, be materially adverse)
and the absence of notes (that, if presented, would not differ materially from those included in
the Balance Sheet); the financial statements referred to in this Section 3.4 reflect the consistent
application of such accounting principles throughout the periods involved. No financial statements
of any Person other than the Company are required by GAAP to be included in the consolidated
financial statements of the Company.

3.5 BOOKS AND RECORDS

               The books of account, minute books, stock record books, and other records of the Company, all
of which have been made available to Buyer, are complete and correct and have been maintained in
accordance with sound business practices and the requirements of Section 13(b)(2) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (regardless of whether or not the Company is subject to that
Section), including the maintenance of an adequate system of internal controls. The minute books of
the Company contain accurate and complete records of all meetings held of, and corporate action
taken by, the stockholders, the Boards of Directors, and committees of the Boards of Directors of
the Company, and no meeting of any such stockholders, Board of Directors, or committee has been
held for which minutes have not been prepared and are not contained in such minute books. At the
Closing, all of those books and records will be in the possession of the Company.

3.6 TITLE TO PROPERTIES; ENCUMBRANCES

               Part 3.6 of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list of all real property,
leaseholds, or other interests therein owned by Company. The Company owns (with good and marketable
title in the case of real property, subject only to the matters permitted by the following
sentence) all the properties and assets (whether real, personal, or mixed and whether tangible or
intangible) that they purport to own, including all of the properties and assets reflected in the
Balance Sheet and the Interim Balance Sheet (except for assets held under capitalized leases
disclosed or not required to be disclosed in Part 3.6 of the Disclosure Letter and personal
property sold since the date of the Balance Sheet and the Interim Balance Sheet, as the case may
be, in the Ordinary Course of Business), and all of the properties and assets purchased or
otherwise acquired by the Company since the date of the Balance Sheet (except for personal property
acquired and sold since the date of the Balance Sheet in the Ordinary Course of Business and
consistent with past practice). All material properties and assets reflected in the Balance Sheet
and the Interim Balance Sheet are free and clear of all Encumbrances and are not, in the case of
real property, subject to any rights of way, building use restrictions, exceptions, variances,
reservations, or limitations of any nature except, with respect to all such properties and assets,
(a) mortgages or security interests shown on the Balance Sheet or the Interim Balance Sheet as
securing specified liabilities or obligations, with respect to which no default (or event that,
with notice or lapse of time or both, would constitute a default) exists, (b) mortgages or security
interests incurred in connection with the purchase of

14



 

property or assets after the date of the Interim Balance Sheet (such mortgages and security
interests being limited to the property or assets so acquired), with respect to which no default
(or event that, with notice or lapse of time or both, would constitute a default) exists, (c) liens
for current taxes not yet due, and (d) with respect to real property, (i) minor imperfections of
title, if any, none of which is substantial in amount, materially detracts from the value or
impairs the use of the property subject thereto, or impairs the operations of the Company, and (ii)
zoning laws and other land use restrictions that do not impair the present or anticipated use of
the property subject thereto. All buildings, plants, and structures owned or leased by the Company
in Broussard, Louisiana lie wholly within the boundaries of the real property leased by the Company
in Broussard, Louisiana and do not encroach upon the real property of, or otherwise conflict with
the real property rights of, any other Person.

3.7 CONDITION AND SUFFICIENCY OF ASSETS

               The buildings, plants, structures, and equipment of the Company are structurally sound, are in
good operating condition and repair, and are adequate for the uses to which they are being put, and
none of such buildings, plants, structures, or equipment is in need of maintenance or repairs
except for ordinary, routine maintenance and repairs that are not material in nature or cost. The
building, plants, structures, and equipment of the Company are sufficient for the continued conduct
of the Company’s businesses after the Closing in substantially the same manner as conducted prior
to the Closing.

3.8 ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE

               All accounts receivable of the Company that are reflected on the Balance Sheet or the Interim
Balance Sheet or on the accounting records of the Company as of the Closing Date (collectively, the
“Accounts Receivable”) represent or will represent valid obligations arising from sales actually
made or services actually performed in the Ordinary Course of Business. Unless paid prior to the
Closing Date, the Accounts Receivable are or will be as of the Closing Date current and collectible
net of the respective reserves shown on the Balance Sheet or the Interim Balance Sheet or on the
accounting records of the Company as of the Closing Date (which reserves are adequate and
calculated consistent with past practice and, in the case of the reserve as of the Closing Date,
will not represent a greater percentage of the Accounts Receivable as of the Closing Date than the
reserve reflected in the Interim Balance Sheet represented of the Accounts Receivable reflected
therein and will not represent a material adverse change in the composition of such Accounts
Receivable in terms of aging). Subject to such reserves, each of the Accounts Receivable either has
been or will be collected in full, without any set-off, within ninety days after the day on which
it first becomes due and payable. There is no contest, claim, or right of set-off, other than
returns in the Ordinary Course of Business, under any Contract with any obligor of an Accounts
Receivable relating to the amount or validity of such Accounts Receivable. Part 3.8 of the
Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list of all Accounts Receivable as of the date
of the Interim Balance Sheet, which list sets forth the aging of such Accounts Receivable.

15



 

3.9 INVENTORY

               All inventory of the Company, whether or not reflected in the Balance Sheet or the Interim
Balance Sheet, consists of a quality and quantity usable and salable in the Ordinary Course of
Business, except for obsolete items and items of below-standard quality, all of which have been
written off or written down to net realizable value in the Balance Sheet or the Interim Balance
Sheet or on the accounting records of the Company as of the Closing Date, as the case may be. All
inventories not written off have been priced at the lower of cost or market on a first in, first
out basis. The quantities of each item of inventory (whether raw materials, work-in-process, or
finished goods) are not excessive, but are reasonable in the present circumstances of the Company.

3.10 NO UNDISCLOSED LIABILITIES

               Except as set forth in Part 3.10 of the Disclosure Letter, the Company has no liabilities or
obligations of any nature (whether known or unknown and whether absolute, accrued, contingent, or
otherwise) except for liabilities or obligations reflected or reserved against in the Balance Sheet
or the Interim Balance Sheet and current liabilities incurred in the Ordinary Course of Business
since the respective dates thereof.

3.11 TAXES

               (a) The Company has filed properly or timely caused to be filed all Tax Returns that are or
were required to be filed by or with respect to it, either separately or as a member of a group of
corporations, pursuant to applicable Legal Requirements. Seller has delivered or made available to
Buyer copies of, and Part 3.11 of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list of,
all such Tax Returns filed since 2001. The Seller and the Company have timely paid or will pay, or
made provision for the payment of, all Taxes with respect to the Company in respect of periods or
portions thereof beginning prior to and ending on or prior to the Closing Date, or pursuant to any
assessment received by Seller or the Company, except such Taxes, if any, as are listed in Part 3.11
of the Disclosure Letter and are being contested in good faith and as to which adequate reserves
(determined in accordance with GAAP) have been provided in the Balance Sheet and the Interim
Balance Sheet. No item of income or gain reported by the Company for financial accounting purposes
in any pre-Closing period is required to be included in taxable income of the Company for a
post-Closing period.

               (b) The United States federal and state income Tax Returns of the Company subject to such
Taxes have been audited by the IRS or relevant state tax authorities or are closed by the
applicable statute of limitations for all taxable years through 2001. Part 3.11 of the Disclosure
Letter contains a complete and accurate list of all audits of all such Tax Returns, including a
reasonably detailed description of the nature and outcome of each audit. All deficiencies proposed
as a result of such audits have been paid, reserved against, settled, or, as described in Part 3.11
of the Disclosure Letter, are being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings. Part 3.11
of the Disclosure Letter describes all adjustments to the Tax Returns filed by the Company or any
group of corporations including the Company for all taxable years since 2001, and the resulting
deficiencies proposed by the IRS. Except as described in Part 3.11 of the Disclosure Letter,
neither Seller or the

16



 

Company has given or been requested to give waivers or extensions (or is or would be subject
to a waiver or extension given by any other Person) of any statute of limitations relating to the
payment of Taxes of the Company or for which the Company may be liable.

               (c) The charges, accruals, and reserves with respect to Taxes on the respective books of the
Company are adequate (determined in accordance with GAAP) and are at least equal to the Company’s
liability for Taxes. There exists no proposed tax assessment against the Company except as
disclosed in the Balance Sheet or in Part 3.11 of the Disclosure Letter. No consent to the
application of Section 341(f)(2) of the Code has been filed with respect to any property or assets
held, acquired, or to be acquired by the Company. All Taxes that the Company is or was required by
Legal Requirements to withhold or collect have been duly withheld or collected and, to the extent
required, have been paid to the proper Governmental Body or other Person.

               (d) All Tax Returns filed by (or that include on a consolidated basis) the Company are true,
correct, and complete. There is no tax sharing agreement that will require any payment by the
Company after the date of this Agreement. During the consistency period (as defined in Section
338(h)(4) of the Code with respect to the sale of the Shares to Buyer), the Company or target
affiliate (as defined in Section 338(h)(6) of the Code with respect to the sale of the Shares to
Buyer) has not sold or will sell any property or assets to Buyer or to any member of the affiliated
group (as defined in Section 338(h)(5) of the Code) that includes Buyer. Part 3.11 of the
Disclosure Letter lists all such target affiliates.

               (e) The Company is an S corporation as defined in the Code Section 1361 and has been treated
in a similar manner for purposes of the income tax laws for all states in which it has been subject
to taxation where such treatment is legally available, and the Company is not and has not been
subject to either the built-in gains tax under Code Section 1374 or the passive income tax under
Code Section 1375. Part 3.11(e) of the Disclosure Letter lists all the states and localities with
respect to which the Company is required to file any corporate income or franchise tax returns and
sets forth whether the Company is treated as the equivalent of an S corporation by or with respect
to each such state or locality. The Company has properly filed Tax Returns with and paid and
discharged any liabilities for Taxes in any states or localities in which it is subject to Tax.
Neither Seller or the Company knows or has reason to believe, after consultation with tax counsel,
that the Buyer’s acquisition of the Company’s capital stock pursuant to this Agreement would not
qualify as a “qualified stock purchase” within the meaning of Section 338 of the Code and the
Treasury Regulations thereunder, as to which an election properly may be made under Section
338(h)(10). The Company has no operations or activities outside of the United States.

               (f) Seller and the Company have disclosed on their federal income Tax Returns all positions
taken therein that could give rise to a substantial understatement of federal income Tax within the
meaning of Code Section 6662.

               (g) The disallowance of a deduction under Code Section 162(m) for employee remuneration will
not apply to any amount paid or payable by Seller under any contractual arrangement currently in
effect.

17



 

3.12 NO MATERIAL ADVERSE CHANGE

               Since the date of the Balance Sheet, there has not been any material adverse change in the
business, operations, properties, prospects, assets, or condition of Company, and no event has
occurred or circumstance exists that may result in such a material adverse change.

3.13 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

               The Seller has delivered to the Buyer a true, correct and complete list (which is set forth on
Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter) of all employee benefit plans of the Company, including all
written employment agreements and all other agreements or arrangements that could obligate the
Company or any affiliate of the Company to make any severance, change-of-control or other, similar
payments and all deferred compensation agreements, together with true, correct and complete copies
of such plans, agreements and any trusts related thereto, and classifications of employees covered
thereby. Except for the employee benefit plans, if any, described on Part 3.13 of the Disclosure
Letter, the Company does not sponsor, maintain or contribute to any plan program, fund or
arrangement that constitutes an “employee pension benefit plan,” and the Company does not have any
obligation to contribute to or accrue or pay any benefits under any deferred compensation or
retirement funding arrangement on behalf of any employee or employees (such as, for example, and
without limitation, any individual retirement account or annuity, any “excess benefit plan” (within
the meaning of Section 3(36) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended
“ERISA”) or any non-qualified deferred compensation arrangement). For the purposes of this
Agreement, the term “employee pension benefit plan” shall have the same meaning as is given that
term in Section 3(2) of ERISA. The Company has not sponsored, maintained or contributed to any
employee pension benefit plan, nor is the Company required to contribute to any retirement plan
pursuant to the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement establishing the terms and
conditions of employment of any of the Company’s employees, other than the plans set forth on Part
3.13 of the Disclosure Letter. The Company is not now, nor as a result of its past activities can
it reasonably be expected to become, liable to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (other than
for premium payments) or to any multi employer employee pension benefit plan under the provisions
of Title IV of ERISA. All employee benefit plans listed in Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter and
the administration thereof are in substantial compliance with their terms and all applicable
provisions of ERISA and the regulations issued thereunder, as well as with all other applicable
federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. All accrued contribution
obligations of the Company or any subsidiary with respect to any plan listed in Part 3.13 of the
Disclosure Letter have either been fulfilled in their entirety or are fully reflected on the
Unaudited Balance Sheets of the Company.

               Compliance with the Code and ERISA. All employee benefit plans listed in Part 3.13
of the Disclosure Letter that are intended to qualify under Section 401(a) of the Code (the
“Qualified Plans”) are, and have been so qualified and have been determined by the Internal Revenue
Service to be so qualified, and copies of such determination letters are included as part of
Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter. To the Seller’s Knowledge, except as disclosed in Part 3.13 of the
Disclosure Letter, all reports and other documents required to be filed with any governmental
agency or distributed to plan participants or beneficiaries (including, but not limited to,
actuarial reports, audits or Returns) have been timely filed or
distributed, and copies thereof are included as part of

18



 

Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter.
No plan listed in Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter, or the Company has engaged in any transaction
prohibited under the provisions of Section 4975 of the Code or Section 406 of ERISA. To the
Sellers’ Knowledge, no employee benefit plan listed in Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter has
incurred an accumulated funding deficiency, as defined in Section 412(a) of the Code and Section
302(1) of ERISA; and the Company has not incurred (i) any liability for excise tax or penalty
payable to the Internal Revenue Service, or (ii) any liability to the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation (other than for premium payments). In addition:

          (i) there have been no terminations or discontinuance of contributions to any
Qualified Plan without notice to and approval by the Internal Revenue Service;

          (ii) no plan listed in Part 3.13 of the Disclosure Letter that is subject to
the provisions of Title IV of ERISA has been terminated;

          (iii) there have been no “reportable events” (as that phrase is defined in
Section 4043 of ERISA) with respect to employee benefit plans listed in Part 3.13 to
the Disclosure Letter;

          (v) the Company has not incurred liability under Section 4062 of ERISA; and

          (vi) no circumstances exist pursuant to which the Company could reasonably be
expected to have any direct or indirect liability whatsoever (including, but not
limited to, any liability to any multi employer plan or the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation under Title IV of ERISA or to the Internal Revenue Service for any
excise tax or penalty, or being subject to any statutory Lien to secure payment of
any such liability) with respect to any plan now or heretofore maintained or
contributed to by any entity other than the Company that is, or at any time was, a
member of a “controlled group” (as defined in Section 412(n)(6)(B) of the Code) that
includes the Company (“Controlled Group”).

The transactions contemplated by this Agreement together with any amounts paid or payable by the
Company or any member of the Controlled Group have not resulted in and will not result in payments
to “disqualified individuals” (as defined in Section 280G(c) of the Code) of the Company or any
member of the Controlled Group which, individually or in the aggregate will constitute “excess
parachute payments” (as defined in Section 280G(b) of the Code) resulting in the imposition of the
excise tax under Section 4999 of the Code or the disallowance of deductions under Section 280G of
the Code.

3.14 COMPLIANCE WITH LEGAL REQUIREMENTS; GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORIZATIONS

          (a) Except as set forth in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter:

19



 

          (i) the Company is, and at all times since January 1, 2005, has been, in full
compliance with each Legal Requirement that is or was applicable to it or to the
conduct or operation of its business or the ownership or use of any of its assets;

          (ii) no event has occurred or circumstance exists that (with or without notice
or lapse of time) (A) may constitute or result in a violation by the Company of, or
a failure on the part of the Company to comply with, any Legal Requirement, or (B)
may give rise to any obligation on the part of the Company to undertake, or to bear
all or any portion of the cost of, any remedial action of any nature; and

          (iii) the Company has not received, at any time since January 1, 2005, any
notice or other communication (whether oral or written) from any Governmental Body
or any other Person regarding (A) any actual, alleged, possible, or potential
violation of, or failure to comply with, any Legal Requirement, or (B) any actual,
alleged, possible, or potential obligation on the part of the Company to undertake,
or to bear all or any portion of the cost of, any remedial action of any nature.

          (b) Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list of each
Governmental Authorization that is held by the Company or that otherwise relates to the business
of, or to any of the assets owned or used by, the Company. Each Governmental Authorization listed
or required to be listed in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter is valid and in full force and
effect. Except as set forth in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter:

     (i) the Company is, and at all times since January 1, 2005, has been, in full
compliance with all of the terms and requirements of each Governmental Authorization
identified or required to be identified in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter;

     (ii) no event has occurred or circumstance exists that may (with or without
notice or lapse of time) (A) constitute or result directly or indirectly in a
violation of or a failure to comply with any term or requirement of any Governmental
Authorization listed or required to be listed in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter,
or (B) result directly or indirectly in the revocation, withdrawal, suspension,
cancellation, or termination of, or any modification to, any Governmental
Authorization listed or required to be listed in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter;

     (iii) the Company has not received, at any time since January 1, 2005 any
notice or other communication (whether oral or written) from any Governmental Body
or any other Person regarding (A) any actual, alleged, possible, or potential
violation of or failure to comply with any term or requirement of any Governmental
Authorization, or (B) any actual, proposed, possible, or potential revocation,
withdrawal, suspension, cancellation, termination of, or modification to any
Governmental Authorization; and

20



 

     (iv) all applications required to have been filed for the renewal of the
Governmental Authorizations listed or required to be listed in Part 3.14 of the
Disclosure Letter have been duly filed on a timely basis with the appropriate
Governmental Bodies, and all other filings required to have been made with respect
to such Governmental Authorizations have been duly made on a timely basis with the
appropriate Governmental Bodies.

The Governmental Authorizations listed in Part 3.14 of the Disclosure Letter collectively
constitute all of the Governmental Authorizations necessary to permit the Company to lawfully
conduct and operate its business in the manner it currently conduct and operates such business and
to permit the Company to owns and use its assets in the manner in which they currently owns and use
such assets.

3.15 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS; ORDERS

               (a) Except as set forth in Part 3.15 of the Disclosure Letter, there is no pending Proceeding:

          (i) that has been commenced by or against the Company or that otherwise relates
to or may affect the business of, or any of the assets owned or used by, the
Company; or

          (ii) that challenges, or that may have the effect of preventing, delaying,
making illegal, or otherwise interfering with, any of the Contemplated Transactions.

To the Knowledge of Seller and the Company, (1) no such Proceeding has been Threatened, and (2) no
event has occurred or circumstance exists that may give rise to or serve as a basis for the
commencement of any such Proceeding. Seller has delivered to Buyer copies of all pleadings,
correspondence, and other documents relating to each Proceeding listed in Part 3.15 of the
Disclosure Letter. The Proceedings listed in Part 3.15 of the Disclosure Letter will not have a
material adverse effect on the business, operations, assets, condition, or prospects of the
Company.

               (b) Except as set forth in Part 3.15 of the Disclosure Letter:

          (i) there is no Order to which any of the Company, or any of the assets owned
or used by the Company, is subject;

          (ii) Seller is not subject to any Order that relates to the business of, or any
of the assets owned or used by, the Company; and

          (iii) no officer, director, agent, or employee of the Company is subject to any
Order that prohibits such officer, director, agent, or employee from engaging in or
continuing any conduct, activity, or practice relating to the business of the
Company.

               (c) Except as set forth in Part 3.15 of the Disclosure Letter:

21



 

          (i) the Company is, and at all times since January 1, 2005 has been, in full
compliance with all of the terms and requirements of each Order to which it, or any
of the assets owned or used by it, is or has been subject;

          (ii) no event has occurred or circumstance exists that may constitute or result
in (with or without notice or lapse of time) a violation of or failure to comply
with any term or requirement of any Order to which the Company, or any of the assets
owned or used by the Company, is subject; and

          (iii) the Company has not received, at any time since January 1, 2005, any
notice or other communication (whether oral or written) from any Governmental Body
or any other Person regarding any actual, alleged, possible, or potential violation
of, or failure to comply with, any term or requirement of any Order to which the
Company, or any of the assets owned or used by the Company, is or has been subject.

3.16 ABSENCE OF CERTAIN CHANGES AND EVENTS

               Except as set forth in Part 3.16 of the Disclosure Letter, since the date of the Balance
Sheet, the Company has conducted its business only in the Ordinary Course of Business and there has
not been any:

               (a) change in the Company’s authorized or issued capital stock; grant of any stock option or
right to purchase shares of capital stock of the Company; issuance of any security convertible into
such capital stock; grant of any registration rights; purchase, redemption, retirement, or other
acquisition by the Company of any shares of any such capital stock; or declaration or payment of
any dividend or other distribution or payment in respect of shares of capital stock other than
distribution to Seller of all funds in Company’s short-term investment account in the amount of
$8,270,000 plus earnings through Closing, which distribution Buyer expressly approves;

               (b) amendment to the Organizational Documents of the Company;

               (c) payment or increase by the Company of any bonuses, salaries, or other compensation to any
stockholder, director, officer, or (except in the Ordinary Course of Business) employee or entry
into any employment, severance, or similar Contract with any director, officer, or employee;

               (d) adoption of, or increase in the payments to or benefits under, any profit sharing, bonus,
deferred compensation, savings, insurance, pension, retirement, or other employee benefit plan for
or with any employees of the Company;

               (e) damage to or destruction or loss of any asset or property of the Company, whether or not
covered by insurance, materially and adversely affecting the properties, assets, business,
financial condition, or prospects of the Company, taken as a whole;

22



 

               (f) entry into, termination of, or receipt of notice of termination of (i) any license,
distributorship, dealer, sales representative, joint venture, credit, or similar agreement, or (ii)
any Contract or transaction involving a total remaining commitment by or to Company of at least
$100,000;

               (g) sale (other than sales of inventory in the Ordinary Course of Business), lease, or other
disposition of any asset or property of the Company or mortgage, pledge, or imposition of any lien
or other encumbrance on any material asset or property of the Company, including the sale, lease,
or other disposition of any of the Intellectual Property Assets;

               (h) cancellation or waiver of any claims or rights with a value to the Company in excess of
$100,000;

               (i) material change in the accounting methods used by the Company; or

               (j) agreement, whether oral or written, by the Company to do any of the foregoing.

3.17 CONTRACTS; NO DEFAULTS

               (a) Part 3.17(a) of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list, and Seller
have delivered to Buyer true and complete copies, of:

          (i) each Applicable Contract that involves performance of services or delivery
of goods or materials by the Company of an amount or value in excess of $100,000;

          (ii) each Applicable Contract that involves performance of services or delivery
of goods or materials to the Company of an amount or value in excess of $100,000;

          (iii) each Applicable Contract that was not entered into in the Ordinary Course
of Business and that involves expenditures or receipts of the Company in excess of
$100,000;

          (iv) each lease, rental or occupancy agreement, license, installment and
conditional sale agreement, and other Applicable Contract affecting the ownership
of, leasing of, title to, use of, or any leasehold or other interest in, any real or
personal property (except personal property leases and installment and conditional
sales agreements having a value per item or aggregate payments of less than $100,000
and with terms of less than one year);

          (v) each licensing agreement or other Applicable Contract with respect to
patents, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual property, including
agreements

23



 

with current or former employees, consultants, or contractors regarding the
appropriation or the non-disclosure of any of the Intellectual Property Assets;

          (vi) each collective bargaining agreement and other Applicable Contract to or
with any labor union or other employee representative of a group of employees;

          (vii) each joint venture, partnership, and other Applicable Contract (however
named) involving a sharing of profits, losses, costs, or liabilities by the Company
with any other Person;

          (viii) each Applicable Contract containing covenants that in any way purport to
restrict the business activity of the Company or any Affiliate of the Company or
limit the freedom of the Company or any Affiliate of the Company to engage in any
line of business or to compete with any Person;

          (ix) each Applicable Contract providing for payments to or by any Person based
on sales, purchases, or profits, other than direct payments for goods;

          (x) each power of attorney that is currently effective and outstanding;

          (xi) each Applicable Contract entered into other than in the Ordinary Course of
Business that contains or provides for an express undertaking by the Company to be
responsible for consequential damages;

          (xii) each Applicable Contract for capital expenditures in excess of $100,000;

          (xiii) each written warranty, guaranty, and or other similar undertaking with
respect to contractual performance extended by the Company other than in the
Ordinary Course of Business; and

          (xiv) each amendment, supplement, and modification (whether oral or written) in
respect of any of the foregoing.

Part 3.17(a) of the Disclosure Letter sets forth reasonably complete details concerning such
Contracts, including the parties to the Contracts, the amount of the remaining commitment of the
Company under the Contracts, and the Company’s office where details relating to the Contracts are
located.

(b) Except as set forth in Part 3.17(b) of the Disclosure Letter:

          (i) neither Seller (and no Related Person of Seller) has or may acquire any
rights under, and neither Seller has or may become subject to any obligation or
liability under, any Contract that relates to the business of, or any of the assets
owned or used by, the Company; and

24



 

          (ii) no officer, director, agent, employee, consultant, or contractor of the
Company is bound by any Contract that purports to limit the ability of such officer,
director, agent, employee, consultant, or contractor to (A) engage in or continue
any conduct, activity, or practice relating to the business of the Company, or (B)
assign to the Company or to any other Person any rights to any invention,
improvement, or discovery.

(c) Except as set forth in Part 3.17(c) of the Disclosure Letter, each Contract identified or
required to be identified in Part 3.17(a) of the Disclosure Letter is in full force and effect and
is valid and enforceable in accordance with its terms.

(d) Except as set forth in Part 3.17(d) of the Disclosure Letter:

          (i) the Company is, and at all times since January 1, 2005, has been, in full
compliance with all applicable terms and requirements of each Contract under which
the Company has or had any obligation or liability or by which such Acquired Company
or any of the assets owned or used by the Company is or was bound;

          (ii) each other Person that has or had any obligation or liability under any
Contract under which the Company has or had any rights is, and at all times since
January 1, 2005, has been, in full compliance with all applicable terms and
requirements of such Contract;

          (iii) no event has occurred or circumstance exists that (with or without notice
or lapse of time) may contravene, conflict with, or result in a violation or breach
of, or give the Company or other Person the right to declare a default or exercise
any remedy under, or to accelerate the maturity or performance of, or to cancel,
terminate, or modify, any Applicable Contract; and

          (iv) the Company has not given to or received from any other Person, at any
time since January 1, 2005, any notice or other communication (whether oral or
written) regarding any actual, alleged, possible, or potential violation or breach
of, or default under, any Contract.

               (e) There are no renegotiations of, attempts to renegotiate, or outstanding rights to
renegotiate any material amounts paid or payable to the Company under current or completed
Contracts with any Person and, to the Knowledge of Seller and the Company, no such Person has made
written demand for such renegotiation.

               (f) The Contracts relating to the sale, design, manufacture, or provision of products or
services by the Company have been entered into in the Ordinary Course of Business and have been
entered into without the commission of any act alone or in concert with any other Person, or any
consideration having been paid or promised, that is or would be in violation of any Legal
Requirement.

25



 

3.18 INSURANCE

          (a) Seller has delivered to Buyer:

          (i) true and complete copies of all policies of insurance to which Company is a
party or under which the Company, or any director of the Company, is or has been
covered at any time within the 5 years preceding the date of this Agreement;

          (ii) true and complete copies of all pending applications for policies of
insurance; and

          (iii) any statement by the auditor of the Company’s financial statements with
regard to the adequacy of such entity’s coverage or of the reserves for claims.

          (b) Part 3.18(b) of the Disclosure Letter describes:

          (i) any self-insurance arrangement by or affecting the Company, including any
reserves established thereunder;

          (ii) any contract or arrangement, other than a policy of insurance, for the
transfer or sharing of any risk by the Company; and

          (iii) all obligations of the Company to third parties with respect to insurance
(including such obligations under leases and service agreements) and identifies the
policy under which such coverage is provided.

          (c) Part 3.18(c) of the Disclosure Letter sets forth, by year, for the current policy year and
each of the 3 preceding policy years:

          (i) a summary of the loss experience under each policy;

          (ii) a statement describing each claim under an insurance policy for an amount
in excess of $50,000, which sets forth:

               (A) the name of the claimant;

               (B) a description of the policy by insurer, type of insurance, and
period of coverage; and

               (C) the amount and a brief description of the claim; and

          (iii) a statement describing the loss experience for all claims that were
self-insured, including the number and aggregate cost of such claims.

26



 

          (d) Except as set forth on Part 3.18(d) of the Disclosure Letter:

          (i) All policies to which the Company is a party or that provide coverage to
Seller, the Company, or any director or officer of the Company:

               (A) are valid, outstanding, and enforceable;

               (B) are issued by an insurer that is financially sound and reputable;

               (C) taken together, provide adequate insurance coverage for the assets
and the operations of the Company for all risks to which the Company is
normally exposed;

               (D) are sufficient for compliance with all Legal Requirements and
Contracts to which the Company is a party or by which any of them is bound;

               (E) will continue in full force and effect following the consummation
of the Contemplated Transactions; and

               (F) do not provide for any retrospective premium adjustment or other
experienced-based liability on the part of the Company.

          (ii) Neither Seller or the Company has received (A) any refusal of coverage or
any notice that a defense will be afforded with reservation of rights, or (B) any
notice of cancellation or any other indication that any insurance policy is no
longer in full force or effect or will not be renewed or that the issuer of any
policy is not willing or able to perform its obligations thereunder.

          (iii) The Company has paid all premiums due, and has otherwise performed all of
its respective obligations, under each policy to which the Company is a party or
that provides coverage to Company or director thereof.

          (iv) The Company has given notice to the insurer of all claims that may be
insured thereby.

3.19 ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS

               Except as set forth in Part 3.19 of the Disclosure Letter:

               (a) The Company is, and at all times has been, in full compliance with, and has not been and
is not in violation of or liable under, any Environmental Law. Neither Seller or the Company has
any basis to expect, nor has any of them or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be
held to be responsible received, any actual or Threatened order, notice, or other communication
from (i) any Governmental Body or private citizen acting in the public interest, or

27



 

(ii) the current or prior owner or operator of any Facilities, of any actual or potential
violation or failure to comply with any Environmental Law, or of any actual or Threatened
obligation to undertake or bear the cost of any Environmental, Health, and Safety Liabilities with
respect to any of the Facilities or any other properties or assets (whether real, personal, or
mixed) in which Seller or the Company has had an interest, or with respect to any property or
Facility at or to which Hazardous Materials were generated, manufactured, refined, transferred,
imported, used, or processed by Seller, the Company, or any other Person for whose conduct they are
or may be held responsible, or from which Hazardous Materials have been transported, treated,
stored, handled, transferred, disposed, recycled, or received.

               (b) There are no pending or, to the Knowledge of Seller and the Company, Threatened claims,
Encumbrances, or other restrictions of any nature, resulting from any Environmental, Health, and
Safety Liabilities or arising under or pursuant to any Environmental Law, with respect to or
affecting any of the Facilities or any other properties and assets (whether real, personal, or
mixed) in which Seller or the Company has or had an interest.

               (c) Neither Seller or the Company has Knowledge of any basis to expect, nor has any of them or
any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible, received, any citation,
directive, inquiry, notice, Order, summons, warning, or other communication that relates to
Hazardous Activity, Hazardous Materials, or any alleged, actual, or potential violation or failure
to comply with any Environmental Law, or of any alleged, actual, or potential obligation to
undertake or bear the cost of any Environmental, Health, and Safety Liabilities with respect to any
of the Facilities or any other properties or assets (whether real, personal, or mixed) in which
Seller or the Company had an interest, or with respect to any property or facility to which
Hazardous Materials generated, manufactured, refined, transferred, imported, used, or processed by
Seller, the Company, or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible,
have been transported, treated, stored, handled, transferred, disposed, recycled, or received.

               (d) Neither Seller or the Company, or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be
held responsible, has any Environmental, Health, and Safety Liabilities with respect to the
Facilities or to the Knowledge of Seller and the Company, with respect to any other properties and
assets (whether real, personal, or mixed) in which Seller or the Company (or any predecessor), has
or had an interest, or at any property geologically or hydrologically adjoining the Facilities or
any such other property or assets.

               (e) There are no Hazardous Materials present on or in the Environment at the Facilities or at
any geologically or hydrologically adjoining property, including any Hazardous Materials contained
in barrels, above or underground storage tanks, landfills, land deposits, dumps, equipment (whether
moveable or fixed) or other containers, either temporary or permanent, and deposited or located in
land, water, sumps, or any other part of the Facilities or such adjoining property, or incorporated
into any structure therein or thereon. Neither Seller, the Company, any other Person for whose
conduct they are or may be held responsible, or to the Knowledge of Seller and the Company, any
other Person, has permitted or conducted, or is aware of, any Hazardous Activity conducted with
respect to the Facilities or any other properties or assets (whether real,

28



 

personal, or mixed) in which Seller or the Company has or had an interest except in full
compliance with all applicable Environmental Laws.

               (f) There has been no Release or, to the Knowledge of Seller and the Company, Threat of
Release, of any Hazardous Materials at or from the Facilities or at any other locations where any
Hazardous Materials were generated, manufactured, refined, transferred, produced, imported, used,
or processed from or by the Facilities, or from or by any other properties and assets (whether
real, personal, or mixed) in which Seller or Company has or had an interest, or to the Knowledge of
Seller and the Company any geologically or hydrologically adjoining property, whether by Seller,
the Company, or any other Person.

               (g) Seller have delivered to Buyer true and complete copies and results of any reports,
studies, analyses, tests, or monitoring possessed or initiated by Seller or the Company pertaining
to Hazardous Materials or Hazardous Activities in, on, or under the Facilities, or concerning
compliance by Seller, the Company, or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held
responsible, with Environmental Laws.

3.20 EMPLOYEES

               (a) Part 3.20 of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list of the following
information for each employee or director of the Company, including each employee on leave of
absence or layoff status: employer; name; job title; current compensation paid or payable and any
change in compensation since January 1, 2005; vacation accrued; and service credited for purposes
of vesting and eligibility to participate under the Company’s pension, retirement, profit-sharing,
thrift-savings, deferred compensation, stock bonus, stock option, cash bonus, employee stock
ownership (including investment credit or payroll stock ownership), severance pay, insurance,
medical, welfare, or vacation plan, other Employee Pension Benefit Plan or Employee Welfare Benefit
Plan, or any other employee benefit plan or any Director Plan.

               (b) No employee or director of the Company is a party to, or is otherwise bound by, any
agreement or arrangement, including any confidentiality, non-competition, or proprietary rights
agreement, between such employee or director and any other Person (“Proprietary Rights Agreement”)
that in any way adversely affects or will affect (i) the performance of his duties as an employee
or director of the Company, or (ii) the ability of the Company to conduct its business, including
any Proprietary Rights Agreement with Seller or the Company by any such employee or director. To
Seller’s Knowledge, no director, officer, or other key employee of the Company intends to terminate
his employment with the Company.

               (c) Part 3.20 of the Disclosure Letter also contains a complete and accurate list of the
following information for each retired employee or director of the Company, or their dependents,
receiving benefits or scheduled to receive benefits in the future: name, pension benefit, pension
option election, retiree medical insurance coverage, retiree life insurance coverage, and other
benefits.

29



 

     3.21 LABOR RELATIONS; COMPLIANCE

          Since January 1, 2005, the Company has not been and is not a party to any collective
bargaining or other labor Contract. Since January 1, 2005, there has not been, there is not
presently pending or existing, and to Seller’s Knowledge there is not Threatened, (a) any strike,
slowdown, picketing, work stoppage, or employee grievance process, (b) any Proceeding against or
affecting the Company relating to the alleged violation of any Legal Requirement pertaining to
labor relations or employment matters, including any charge or complaint filed by an employee or
union with the National Labor Relations Board, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, or any
comparable Governmental Body, organizational activity, or other labor or employment dispute against
or affecting any of the Company or its premises, or (c) any application for certification of a
collective bargaining agent. No event has occurred or circumstance exists that could provide the
basis for any work stoppage or other labor dispute. There is no lockout of any employees by the
Company, and no such action is contemplated by the Company. The Company has complied in all
respects with all Legal Requirements relating to employment, equal employment opportunity,
nondiscrimination, immigration, wages, hours, benefits, collective bargaining, the payment of
social security and similar taxes, occupational safety and health, and plant closing. The Company
is not liable for the payment of any compensation, damages, taxes, fines, penalties, or other
amounts, however designated, for failure to comply with any of the foregoing Legal Requirements.

     3.22 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

          (a) Intellectual Property Assets—The term “Intellectual Property Assets”
includes:

     (i) the name “Specialty Rental Tools Inc.”, all fictional business names,
trading names, registered and unregistered trademarks, service marks, and
applications (collectively, “Marks”);

     (ii) all patents, patent applications, and inventions and discoveries that may
be patentable (collectively, “Patents”);

     (iii) all copyrights in both published works and unpublished works
(collectively, “Copyrights”);

     (iv) all rights in mask works (collectively, “Rights in Mask Works”); and

     (v) all know-how, trade secrets, confidential information, customer lists,
software, technical information, data, process technology, plans, drawings, and blue
prints (collectively, “Trade Secrets”); owned, used, or licensed by the Company as
licensee or licensor.

          (b) Agreements—Part 3.22(b) of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate
list and summary description, including any royalties paid or received by the Company, of all
Contracts relating to the Intellectual Property Assets to which the Company is a party or by which
the Company is bound, except for any license implied by the sale of a product and perpetual,
paid-up

30



 

licenses for commonly available software programs with a value of less than $1,000 under
which the Company is the licensee. There are no outstanding and, to Seller’s Knowledge, no
Threatened disputes or disagreements with respect to any such agreement.

          (c) Know-How Necessary for the Business

     (i) The Intellectual Property Assets are all those necessary for the operation
of the Company’s businesses as they are currently conducted. The Company is the
owner of all right, title, and interest in and to each of the Intellectual Property
Assets, free and clear of all liens, security interests, charges, encumbrances,
equities, and other adverse claims, and has the right to use without payment to a
third party all of the Intellectual Property Assets.

     (ii) Except as set forth in Part 3.22(c) of the Disclosure Letter, all former
and current employees of the Company have executed written Contracts with one or
more of the Company that assign to one or more of the Company all rights to any
inventions, improvements, discoveries, or information relating to the business of
the Company. No employee of the Company has entered into any Contract that restricts
or limits in any way the scope or type of work in which the employee may be engaged
or requires the employee to transfer, assign, or disclose information concerning his
work to anyone other than one or more of the Company.

          (d) Patents

     (i) Part 3.22(d) of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list
and summary description of all Patents. One or more of the Company is the owner of
all right, title, and interest in and to each of the Patents, free and clear of all
liens, security interests, charges, encumbrances, entities, and other adverse
claims.

     (ii) All of the issued Patents are currently in compliance with formal legal
requirements (including payment of filing, examination, and maintenance fees and
proofs of working or use), are valid and enforceable, and are not subject to any
maintenance fees or taxes or actions falling due within ninety days after the
Closing Date.

     (iii) No Patent has been or is now involved in any interference, reissue,
reexamination, or opposition proceeding. To Seller’s Knowledge, there is no
potentially interfering patent or patent application of any third party.

     (iv) To Seller’s Knowledge no Patent is infringed or has been challenged or
threatened in any way. To Seller’s Knowledge none of the products manufactured and
sold, nor any process or know-how used, by the Company infringes or is alleged to
infringe any patent or other proprietary right of any other Person.

31



 

     (v) All products made, used, or sold under the Patents have been marked with
the proper patent notice.

          (e) Trademarks

     (i) Part 3.22(e) of Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list and
summary description of all Marks. The Company is the owner of all right, title, and
interest in and to each of the Marks, free and clear of all liens, security
interests, charges, encumbrances, equities, and other adverse claims.

     (ii) All Marks that have been registered with the United States Patent and
Trademark Office are currently in compliance with all formal legal requirements
(including the timely post-registration filing of affidavits of use and
incontestability and renewal applications), are valid and enforceable, and are not
subject to any maintenance fees or taxes or actions falling due within ninety days
after the Closing Date.

     (iii) No Mark has been or is now involved in any opposition, invalidation, or
cancellation and, to Seller’s Knowledge, no such action is Threatened with the
respect to any of the Marks.

     (iv) To Seller’s Knowledge, there is no potentially interfering trademark or
trademark application of any third party.

     (v) To Seller’s Knowledge no Mark is infringed or has been challenged or
threatened in any way. To Seller’s Knowledge none of the Marks used by the Company
infringes or is alleged to infringe any trade name, trademark, or service mark of
any third party.

     (vi) All products and materials containing a Mark bear the proper federal
registration notice where permitted by law.

          (f) Copyrights

     (i) Part 3.22(f) of the Disclosure Letter contains a complete and accurate list
and summary description of all Copyrights. The Company is the owner of all right,
title, and interest in and to each of the Copyrights, free and clear of all liens,
security interests, charges, encumbrances, equities, and other adverse claims.

     (ii) All the Copyrights have been registered and are currently in compliance
with formal legal requirements, are valid and enforceable, and are not subject to
any maintenance fees or taxes or actions falling due within ninety days after the
date of Closing.

32



 

     (iii) To Seller’s Knowledge, no Copyright is infringed or has been challenged
or threatened in any way. To Seller’s Knowledge none of the subject matter of any
of the Copyrights infringes or is alleged to infringe any copyright of any third
party or is a derivative work based on the work of a third party.

     (iv) All works encompassed by the Copyrights have been marked with the proper
copyright notice.

          (g) Trade Secrets

     (i) With respect to each Trade Secret, the documentation relating to such Trade
Secret is current, accurate, and sufficient in detail and content to identify and
explain it and to allow its full and proper use without reliance on the knowledge or
memory of any individual.

     (ii) Seller and the Company have taken all reasonable precautions to protect
the secrecy, confidentiality, and value of their Trade Secrets.

     (iii) The Company has good title and an absolute (but not necessarily
exclusive) right to use the Trade Secrets. The Trade Secrets are not part of the
public knowledge or literature, and, to Seller’s Knowledge, have not been used,
divulged, or appropriated either for the benefit of any Person (other than one or
more of the Company) or to the detriment of the Company. To Seller’s Knowledge, no
Trade Secret is subject to any adverse claim or has been challenged or threatened in
any way.

     3.23 CERTAIN PAYMENTS

          Since January 1, 2004, neither the Company nor any director or officer of the Company, nor to
Seller’s Knowledge any agent, employee or any other Person associated with or acting for or on
behalf of the Company, has directly or indirectly (a) made any contribution, gift, bribe, rebate,
payoff, influence payment, kickback, or other payment to any Person, private or public, regardless
of form, whether in money, property, or services (i) to obtain favorable treatment in securing
business, (ii) to pay for favorable treatment for business secured, (iii) to obtain special
concessions or for special concessions already obtained, for or in respect of the Company or any
Affiliate of the Company, or (iv) in violation of any Legal Requirement, (b) established or
maintained any fund or asset that has not been recorded in the books and records of the Company.

     3.24 DISCLOSURE

          (a) No representation or warranty of Seller in this Agreement and no statement in the
Disclosure Letter omits to state a material fact necessary to make the statements herein or
therein, in light of the circumstances in which they were made, not misleading.

33



 

          (b) No notice given pursuant to Section 5.5 will contain any untrue statement or omit to state
a material fact necessary to make the statements therein or in this Agreement, in light of the
circumstances in which they were made, not misleading.

          (c) There is no fact known to either Seller that has specific application to either Seller or
the Company (other than general economic or industry conditions) and that materially adversely
affects or, as far as Seller can reasonably foresee, materially threatens, the assets, business,
prospects, financial condition, or results of operations of the Company (on a consolidated basis)
that has not been set forth in this Agreement or the Disclosure Letter.

     3.25 RELATIONSHIPS WITH RELATED PERSONS

          Except as set forth in Part 3.25 of the Disclosure Letter, neither Seller nor any Related
Person of Seller or of the Company has, or since January 1, 2005, has had, any interest in any
property (whether real, personal, or mixed and whether tangible or intangible), used in or
pertaining to the Company’s business. No Seller or any Related Person of Seller or of the Company
is, or since has owned (of record or as a beneficial owner) an equity interest or any other
financial or profit interest in, a Person that has (i) had business dealings or a material
financial interest in any transaction with the Company [other than business dealings or
transactions conducted in the Ordinary Course of Business with the Company at substantially
prevailing market prices and on substantially prevailing market terms], or (ii) engaged in
competition with Company with respect to any line of the products or services of the Company (a
“Competing Business”) in any market presently served by the Company except for less than two
percent of the outstanding capital stock of any Competing Business that is publicly traded on any
recognized exchange or in the over-the-counter market. Except as set forth in Part 3.25 of the
Disclosure Letter, neither Seller nor any Related Person of Seller or of the Company is a party to
any Contract with, or has any claim or right against, the Company.

     3.26 BROKERS OR FINDERS

          Seller and their agents have incurred no obligation or liability, contingent or otherwise, for
brokerage or finders’ fees or agents’ commissions or other similar payment in connection with this
Agreement.

4. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF BUYER

     Buyer represents and warrants to Seller as follows:

     4.1 ORGANIZATION AND GOOD STANDING

          Buyer is a corporation duly organized, validly existing, and in good standing under the laws
of the State of Delaware.

34



 

     4.2 AUTHORITY; NO CONFLICT

          (a) This Agreement constitutes the legal, valid, and binding obligation of Buyer, enforceable
against Buyer in accordance with its terms. Upon the execution and delivery by Buyer of the
Employment Agreement (collectively, the “Buyer’s Closing Documents”), the Buyer’s Closing Documents
will constitute the legal, valid, and binding obligations of Buyer, enforceable against Buyer in
accordance with their respective terms. Buyer has the absolute and unrestricted right, power, and
authority to execute and deliver this Agreement and the Buyer’s Closing Documents and to perform
its obligations under this Agreement and the Buyer’s Closing Documents.

          (b) Except as set forth in Schedule 4.2, neither the execution and delivery of this Agreement
by Buyer nor the consummation or performance of any of the Contemplated Transactions [by Buyer]
will give any Person the right to prevent, delay, or otherwise interfere with any of the
Contemplated Transactions pursuant to:

     (i) any provision of Buyer’s Organizational Documents;

     (ii) any resolution adopted by the board of directors or the stockholders of
Buyer;

     (iii) any Legal Requirement or Order to which Buyer may be subject; or

     (iv) any Contract to which Buyer is a party or by which Buyer may be bound.

Except as set forth in Schedule 4.2, Buyer is not and will not be required to obtain any Consent
from any Person in connection with the execution and delivery of this Agreement or the consummation
or performance of any of the Contemplated Transactions.

     4.3 INVESTMENT INTENT

          Buyer is acquiring the Shares for its own account and not with a view to their distribution
within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the Securities Act.

     4.4 CERTAIN PROCEEDINGS

          There is no pending Proceeding that has been commenced against Buyer and that challenges, or
may have the effect of preventing, delaying, making illegal, or otherwise interfering with, any of
the Contemplated Transactions. To Buyer’s Knowledge, no such Proceeding has been Threatened.

     4.5 BROKERS OR FINDERS

          Buyer and its officers and agents have incurred no obligation or liability, contingent or
otherwise, for brokerage or finders’ fees or agents’ commissions or other similar payment in

35



 

connection with this Agreement and will indemnify and hold Seller harmless from any such payment alleged to be due
by or through Buyer as a result of the action of Buyer or its officers or agents.

5. COVENANTS OF SELLER PRIOR TO CLOSING DATE

     5.1 ACCESS AND INVESTIGATION

          Between the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Seller will, and will cause the
Company and its Representatives to, (a) afford Buyer and its Representatives and prospective
lenders and their Representatives (collectively, “Buyer’s Advisors”) full and free access to the
Company’s personnel, properties (including subsurface testing), contracts, books and records, and
other documents and data, (b) furnish Buyer and Buyer’s Advisors with copies of all such contracts,
books and records, and other existing documents and data as Buyer may reasonably request, and (c)
furnish Buyer and Buyer’s Advisors with such additional financial, operating, and other data and
information as Buyer may reasonably request.

     5.2 OPERATION OF THE BUSINESSES OF THE COMPANY

          Between the date of this Agreement and through and including the Closing Date Seller or the
Company, as applicable, will:

     (a) conduct the business of the Company only in the Ordinary Course of Business;

     (b) use his Best Efforts to preserve intact the current business organization of the Company,
keep available the services of the current officers, employees, and agents of the Company, and
maintain the relations and good will with suppliers, customers, landlords, creditors, employees,
agents, and others having business relationships with the Company;

     (c) confer with Buyer concerning operational matters of a material nature;

     (d) otherwise report periodically to Buyer concerning the status of the business, operations,
and finances of the Company;

     (e) Company will pay off all bank debt to Iberia Bank or other notes payable up to a maximum
of $3,600,000, excluding notes on vehicles;

     (f) Company will make a profit sharing plan contribution for 2005, at Company’s expense, not
to exceed $200,000 and, thereafter, terminate the plan;

     (g) Company will pay the bonuses and commissions from the Contribution as described in Section
2.7;

     (h) Company will pay Tax resulting from the Company’s income and earnings (S corporation flow
through) for 2005 and short-year 2006 of $5,400,000;

36



 

     (i) Company will pay to Seller the short term investment account of the Company of
approximately $8,270,000 plus accrued interest, provided, however, the Company shall not contribute
any additional amounts to such account; and

     (j) maintain the Accounts Receivable and accounts payable in the Ordinary Course of Business
and not allow any material adverse change in the Accounts Receivable or accounts payable.

     5.3 NEGATIVE COVENANT

          Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Agreement, in particular Section 5.2, between
the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Seller will not, and will cause the Company not
to, without the prior consent of Buyer, take any affirmative action, or fail to take any reasonable
action within their or its control, as a result of which any of the changes or events listed in
Section 3.16 is likely to occur.

     5.4 REQUIRED APPROVALS

          As promptly as practicable after the date of this Agreement, Seller will, and will cause the
Company to, make all filings required by Legal Requirements to be made by them in order to
consummate the Contemplated Transactions (including all filings under the HSR Act). Between the
date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Seller will, and will cause the Company to, (a)
cooperate with Buyer with respect to all filings that Buyer elects to make or is required by Legal
Requirements to make in connection with the Contemplated Transactions, and (b) cooperate with Buyer
in obtaining all consents identified in Schedule 4.2 (including taking all actions requested by
Buyer to cause early termination of any applicable waiting period under the HSR Act).

     5.5 NOTIFICATION

          Between the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, the Seller will promptly notify Buyer
in writing if Seller or the Company becomes aware of any fact or condition that causes or
constitutes a Breach of any of Seller’s representations and warranties as of the date of this
Agreement, or if Seller or the Company becomes aware of the occurrence after the date of this
Agreement of any fact or condition that would (except as expressly contemplated by this Agreement)
cause or constitute a Breach of any such representation or warranty had such representation or
warranty been made as of the time of occurrence or discovery of such fact or condition. Should any
such fact or condition require any change in the Disclosure Letter if the Disclosure Letter were
dated the date of the occurrence or discovery of any such fact or condition, Seller will promptly
deliver to Buyer a supplement to the Disclosure Letter specifying such change. During the same
period, the Seller will promptly notify Buyer of the occurrence of any Breach of any covenant of
Seller in this Section 5 or of the occurrence of any event that may make the satisfaction of the
conditions in Section 7 impossible or unlikely.

37



 

     5.6 PAYMENT OF INDEBTEDNESS BY RELATED PERSONS

          Except as expressly provided in this Agreement, Seller will cause all indebtedness owed to the
Company by Seller or any Related Person of Seller to be paid in full prior to Closing.

     5.7 NO NEGOTIATION

          Until such time, if any, as this Agreement is terminated pursuant to Section 9, Seller will
not, and will cause the Company and each of their Representatives not to, directly or indirectly
solicit, initiate, or encourage any inquiries or proposals from, discuss or negotiate with, provide
any non-public information to, or consider the merits of any unsolicited inquiries or proposals
from, any Person (other than Buyer) relating to any transaction involving the sale of the business
or assets (other than in the Ordinary Course of Business) of the Company, or any of the capital
stock of the Company, or any merger, consolidation, business combination, or similar transaction
involving the Company.

     5.8 BEST EFFORTS

          Between the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Seller and Buyer will use their Best
Efforts to cause the conditions in Sections 7 and 8 to be satisfied.

     5.9 TAX MATTERS

          Seller will and will cause the Company to:

     (a) Post-Closing Tax Returns. Cause all Taxes attributable to the Section 338(h)(10)
Elections to be considered allocable to the taxable period or portion thereof ending on the Closing
Date and payable by Seller. To the extent permitted by applicable law, Seller shall include any
income, gain, loss, deduction or other Tax items for such periods on his Tax Returns in a manner
consistent with the Schedule K-1’s furnished to Seller with respect to the Company. The Buyer
shall prepare (or cause to be prepared) and file (or cause to be filed) each Tax Return required to
be filed by the Company after the Closing Date for a taxable period beginning after the Closing
Date.

     (b) Section 338(h)(10) Election. Join with the Buyer in making Section 338(h)(10) Elections
with respect to the sale and purchase of the Shares under this Agreement, if the Buyer, in its sole
discretion, decides to make such elections. The Seller and Buyer shall cooperate fully with each
other and make available to each other such Tax data and other information as may be reasonably
required by the Buyer in order to decide whether to make the Section 338(h)(10) Elections.

     (c) Preparation and filing of documents related to Section 338(h)(10) Elections. If the Buyer
decides to make the Section 338(h)(10) Elections, the Buyer shall give the Seller notice of its
decision to make the Section 338(h)(10) Elections, and the Parties shall cooperate fully with each
other and make available to each other such Tax data and other information as may be reasonably
required by the Buyer or the Seller in order to timely file, preserve or perfect the Section
338(h)(10) Elections. Buyer shall be responsible for the preparation and filing of all forms and documents necessary for making or
perfecting the

38



 

Section 338(h)(10) Elections (collectively, “Section 338 Forms”). Buyer shall
provide the Section 338 Forms to the Seller for execution and shall advise the Seller in writing of
those actions that Buyer reasonably considers necessary and appropriate for the Seller to take to
effect, preserve, or perfect timely the Section 338(h)(10) Elections. The Seller agrees to take
such actions so reasonably advised by Buyer. The Sellers agree to execute and deliver to the Buyer
the Section 338 Forms provided by the Buyer for execution not later than ten (10) business days
after any such forms are provided by Buyer for execution, and take timely such other actions as may
be necessary to effect, preserve, or perfect timely the Section 338(h)(10) Elections.

          (d) Purchase Price Allocation. The parties agree that the consideration to be paid pursuant
to Section 2.2 and Section 2.5 of this Agreement and other items properly includible in the deemed
sales price of the assets of the Company pursuant to the Section 338(h)(10) Elections shall be
allocated, for Tax purposes, among the assets of the Company in a manner consistent with the
provisions of Section 338 and Section 1060 of the Code and all regulations promulgated thereunder,
and the Seller and Buyer shall fully cooperate in making the allocation of such consideration and
other items properly included in the deemed sales price. The Buyer shall prepare IRS Form 8883 for
inclusion with the federal income Tax Return of the Company ending on the Closing Date and any
similar allocation required under state, local, or foreign law (collectively, “IRS Form 8883”).
The Buyer shall permit the Seller’s representative to review and comment on IRS Form 8883. The
Company, the Seller and the Buyer agree to report this transaction for federal Tax purposes as a
valid election under Section 338(h)(10) and in accordance with IRS Form 8883 as ultimately filed,
and shall not take any position or action inconsistent therewith upon examination of any Tax
Return, in any refund claim, in any litigation, investigation or otherwise; provided, however, that
if, in any audit of any Tax Return of the Seller, the Company or the Buyer by a Government Body,
the fair market values are finally determined to be different from IRS Form 8883, as adjusted, the
Buyer, the Company and the Seller may (but shall not be obligated to) take any position or action
consistent with the fair market values as finally determined in such audit.

          (e) Tax Certificate. Upon request, use reasonable efforts to obtain any certificate or other
documents from any Governmental Body or any other Person as may be necessary to mitigate, reduce or
eliminate any Taxes that could be imposed pursuant to the Section 338(h)(10) Elections.

6. COVENANTS OF BUYER PRIOR TO CLOSING DATE

     6.1 APPROVALS OF GOVERNMENTAL BODIES

          As promptly as practicable after the date of this Agreement, Buyer will, and will cause each
of its Related Persons to, make all filings required by Legal Requirements to be made by them to
consummate the Contemplated Transactions (including all filings under the HSR Act). Between the
date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Buyer will, and will cause each Related Person to,
cooperate with Seller with respect to all filings that Seller are required by Legal Requirements to
make in connection with the Contemplated Transactions, and (ii) cooperate with Seller in obtaining

39



 

all consents identified in Part 3.2 of the Disclosure Letter; provided that this Agreement will not require Buyer to dispose of or make
any change in any portion of its business or to incur any other burden to obtain a Governmental
Authorization.

     6.2 PAYMENT OF CERTAIN FEES AND EXPENSES

          Buyer agrees to pay all fees and expenses associated with (i) compliance with the HSR Act,
(ii) preparation of the Balance Sheet, the Interim Term Balance Sheet and other financial
statements and reports by UHY Mann Frankfort Stein & Lipp or others, (iii) any auditing or testing
work performed by UHY Mann Frankfort Stein and Lipp or others, (iv) any environmental testing and
the Phase I environmental report, and (v) the Section 338(h)(10) Elections and compliance therewith
including legal and accounting fees of Seller related thereto.

7. CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO BUYER’S OBLIGATION TO CLOSE

     Buyer’s obligation to purchase the Shares and to take the other actions required to be taken
by Buyer at the Closing is subject to the satisfaction, at or prior to the Closing, of each of the
following conditions (any of which may be waived by Buyer, in whole or in part):

     7.1 ACCURACY OF REPRESENTATIONS

          (a) All of Seller’s representations and warranties in this Agreement (considered
collectively), and each of these representations and warranties (considered individually), must
have been accurate in all material respects as of the date of this Agreement, and must be accurate
in all material respects as of the Closing Date as if made on the Closing Date, without giving
effect to any supplement to the Disclosure Letter.

          (b) Each of Seller’s representations and warranties in Sections 3.3, 3.4, 3.12, and 3.24 must
have been accurate in all respects as of the date of this Agreement, and must be accurate in all
respects as of the Closing Date as if made on the Closing Date, without giving effect to any
supplement to the Disclosure Letter.

     7.2 SELLER’ PERFORMANCE

          (a) All of the covenants and obligations that Seller are required to perform or to comply with
pursuant to this Agreement at or prior to the Closing (considered collectively), and each of these
covenants and obligations (considered individually), must have been duly performed and complied
with in all material respects.

          (b) Each document required to be delivered pursuant to Section 2.4 must have been delivered,
and each of the other covenants and obligations in Sections 5.4 and 5.8 must have been performed
and complied with in all respects.

40



 

     7.3 CONSENTS

          Each of the Consents identified in Part 3.2 of the Disclosure Letter, and each Consent
identified in Schedule 4.2, must have been obtained and must be in full force and effect.

     7.4 ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS

          Each of the following documents must have been delivered to Buyer:

          (a) an opinion of Perret Doise, A Professional Law Corporation, dated the Closing Date, in the
form reasonably satisfactory to Buyer;

          (b) estoppel certificate executed on behalf of Seller or JEVM, L.L.C. as to real property
leased by the Company from Seller or JEVM, L.L.C., dated as of the Closing Date, each in the form
of Exhibit 7.4(b); and

          (c) such other documents as Buyer may reasonably request for the purpose of (i) enabling its
counsel to provide the opinion referred to in Section 8.4(a), (ii) evidencing the accuracy of any
of Seller’s representations and warranties, (iii) evidencing the performance by Seller of, or the
compliance by Seller with, any covenant or obligation required to be performed or complied with by
Seller, (iv) evidencing the satisfaction of any condition referred to in this Section 7, or (v)
otherwise facilitating the consummation or performance of any of the Contemplated Transactions.

     7.5 NO PROCEEDINGS

          Since the date of this Agreement, there must not have been commenced or Threatened against
Buyer, or against any Person affiliated with Buyer, any Proceeding (a) involving any challenge to,
or seeking damages or other relief in connection with, any of the Contemplated Transactions, or (b)
that may have the effect of preventing, delaying, making illegal, or otherwise interfering with any
of the Contemplated Transactions.

     7.6 NO CLAIM REGARDING STOCK OWNERSHIP OR SALE PROCEEDS

          There must not have been made or Threatened by any Person any claim asserting that such Person
(a) is the holder or the beneficial owner of, or has the right to acquire or to obtain beneficial
ownership of, any stock of, or any other voting, equity, or ownership interest in, any of the
Company, or (b) is entitled to all or any portion of the Purchase Price payable for the Shares.

     7.7 NO PROHIBITION

          Neither the consummation nor the performance of any of the Contemplated Transactions will,
directly or indirectly (with or without notice or lapse of time), materially contravene, or
conflict with, or result in a material violation of, or cause Buyer or any Person affiliated with
Buyer to suffer any material adverse consequence under, (a) any applicable Legal

41



 

Requirement or Order, or (b) any Legal
Requirement or Order that has been published, introduced, or otherwise proposed by or before any
Governmental Body.

     7.8 FINANCING

          Buyer shall have obtained on terms and conditions satisfactory to it all of the financing
Buyer needs in order to consummate the Contemplated Transactions. In the event that Buyer is
unable to obtain the necessary financing prior to January 31, 2006, then Buyer shall pay to Seller
an amount equal to $1,500,000 in cash (“Breakup Fee”) by wire transfer of immediately available
funds to an account designated by Seller, provided, however, that Seller shall not be entitled to
the Breakup Fee if Seller materially Breaches any provision of the Agreement or fails to satisfy
any of the conditions in Section 7 of this Agreement and such Breach or failure is the cause of
Buyer’s inability to obtain financing. The Breakup Fee shall be the sole and exclusive remedy of
the Seller in the event Buyer is unable to obtain financing and the parties have agreed that such
Breakup Fee shall constitute liquidation damages.

8. CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO SELLER’ OBLIGATION TO CLOSE

     Seller’ obligation to sell the Shares and to take the other actions required to be taken by
Seller at the Closing is subject to the satisfaction, at or prior to the Closing, of each of the
following conditions (any of which may be waived by Seller, in whole or in part):

     8.1 ACCURACY OF REPRESENTATIONS

          All of Buyer’s representations and warranties in this Agreement (considered collectively), and
each of these representations and warranties (considered individually), must have been accurate in
all material respects as of the date of this Agreement and must be accurate in all material
respects as of the Closing Date as if made on the Closing Date.

     8.2 BUYER’S PERFORMANCE

          (a) All of the covenants and obligations that Buyer is required to perform or to comply with
pursuant to this Agreement at or prior to the Closing (considered collectively), and each of
these covenants and obligations (considered individually), must have been performed and complied
with in all material respects.

          (b) Buyer must have delivered each of the documents required to be delivered by Buyer pursuant
to Section 2.4 and must have made the cash payments required to be made by Buyer pursuant to
Sections 2.4(b)(i) and 2.4(b)(ii).

     8.3 NO INJUNCTION

          There must not be in effect any Legal Requirement or any injunction or other Order that (a)
prohibits the sale of the Shares by Seller to Buyer, and (b) has been adopted or issued, or has
otherwise become effective, since the date of this Agreement.

42



 

     8.4 ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS

          Each of the following documents must be delivered to Seller:

          (a) an opinion of General Counsel to Buyer, dated the Closing Date, in the form of Exhibit
8.4(a); 

          (b) such other documents as Seller may reasonably request for the purpose of (i) enabling
their counsel to provide the opinion referred to in Section 7.4(a), (ii) evidencing the accuracy of
any representation or warranty of Buyer, (iii) evidencing the performance by Buyer of, or the
compliance by Buyer with, any covenant or obligation required to be performed or complied with by
Buyer, (ii) evidencing the satisfaction of any condition referred to in this Section 8, or (v)
otherwise facilitating the consummation of any of the Contemplated Transactions.

     8.5 NO PROHIBITION

          Neither the consummation nor the performance of any of the Transactions will, directly or
indirectly (with or without notice or lapse of time), materially contravene or conflict with, or
result in a material violation of, or cause Seller to suffer any material adverse consequence
under, (a) any applicable Legal Requirement or Order, or (b) any Legal Requirement or Order that
has been published, introduced, or otherwise proposed by or before any Governmental Body.

9. TERMINATION

     9.1 TERMINATION EVENTS

          This Agreement may, by notice given prior to or at the Closing, be terminated:

          (a) by either Buyer or Seller if a material Breach of any provision of this Agreement has been
committed by the other party and such Breach has not been waived;

          (b) (i) by Buyer if any of the conditions in Section 7 has not been satisfied as of the
Closing Date or if satisfaction of such a condition is or becomes impossible (other than through
the failure of Buyer to comply with its obligations under this Agreement) and Buyer has not waived
such condition on or before the Closing Date; or (ii) by Seller, if any of the conditions in
Section 8 has not been satisfied of the Closing Date or if satisfaction of such a condition is or
becomes impossible (other than through the failure of Seller to comply with their obligations under
this Agreement) and Seller have not waived such condition on or before the Closing Date;

          (c) by mutual consent of Buyer and Seller; or

          (d) by either Buyer or Seller if the Closing has not occurred (other than through the failure
of any party seeking to terminate this Agreement to comply fully with its obligations

43



 

under this
Agreement) on or before January 31, 2006, or such later date as the parties may agree upon.

     9.2 EFFECT OF TERMINATION

          Each party’s right of termination under Section 9.1 is in addition to any other rights it may
have under this Agreement or otherwise, and the exercise of a right of termination will not be an
election of remedies. If this Agreement is terminated pursuant to Section 9.1, all further
obligations of the parties under this Agreement will terminate, except that the obligations in
Sections 11.1 and 11.3 will survive; provided, however, that if this Agreement is terminated by a
party because of the Breach of the Agreement by the other party or because one or more of the
conditions to the terminating party’s obligations under this Agreement is not satisfied as a result
of the other party’s failure to comply with its obligations under this Agreement, the terminating
party’s right to pursue all legal remedies will survive such termination unimpaired.

10. INDEMNIFICATION; REMEDIES

     10.1 SURVIVAL; RIGHT TO INDEMNIFICATION NOT AFFECTED BY KNOWLEDGE

          All representations, warranties, covenants, and obligations in this Agreement, the Disclosure
Letter, the supplements to the Disclosure Letter, the certificate delivered pursuant to Section
2.4(a)(iv), and any other certificate or document delivered pursuant to this Agreement will survive
the Closing. The right to indemnification, payment of Damages or other remedy based on such
representations, warranties, covenants, and obligations will not be affected by any investigation
conducted with respect to, or any Knowledge acquired (or capable of being acquired) at any time,
whether before or after the execution and delivery of this Agreement or the Closing Date, with
respect to the accuracy or inaccuracy of or compliance with, any such representation, warranty,
covenant, or obligation. The waiver of any condition based on the accuracy of any representation or
warranty, or on the performance of or compliance with any covenant or obligation, will not affect
the right to indemnification, payment of Damages, or other remedy based on such representations,
warranties, covenants, and obligations.

     10.2 INDEMNIFICATION AND PAYMENT OF DAMAGES BY SELLER

          Subject to the limitations contained in Sections 10.5 and 10.6, Seller will indemnify and hold
harmless Buyer, the Company, and their respective Representatives, stockholders, controlling
persons, and affiliates (collectively, the “Indemnified Persons”) for, and will pay to the
Indemnified Persons the amount of, any loss, liability, claim, damage (including incidental and
consequential damages), expense (including costs of investigation and defense and reasonable
attorneys’ fees) or diminution of value, whether or not involving a third-party claim
(collectively, “Damages”), arising, directly or indirectly, from or in connection with:

          (a) any Breach of any representation or warranty made by Seller in this Agreement (without
giving effect to any supplement to the Disclosure Letter, the Disclosure Letter,

44



 

the supplements to
the Disclosure Letter, or any other certificate or document delivered by Seller pursuant to this
Agreement;

          (b) any Breach of any representation or warranty made by Seller in this Agreement as if such
representation or warranty were made on and as of the Closing Date without giving effect to any
supplement to the Disclosure Letter, other than any such Breach that is disclosed in a supplement
to the Disclosure Letter and is expressly identified in the certificate delivered pursuant to
Section 2.4(a)(iv) as having caused the condition specified in Section 7.1 not to be satisfied;

          (c) any Breach by Seller of any covenant or obligation of Seller in this Agreement;

          (d) any product shipped or manufactured by, or any services provided by, the Company prior to
the Closing Date;

          (e) any matter disclosed in Part 3.15 of the Disclosure Letter; or

          (f) any claim by any Person for brokerage or finder’s fees or commissions or similar payments
based upon any agreement or understanding alleged to have been made by any such Person with Seller
or the Company (or any Person acting on their behalf) in connection with any of the Contemplated
Transactions.

     10.3 INDEMNIFICATION AND PAYMENT OF DAMAGES BY SELLER— ENVIRONMENTAL
MATTERS

          In addition to the provisions of Section 10.2, and subject to the limitations set forth in
Sections 10.5 and 10.6, Seller will indemnify and hold harmless Buyer, the Company, and the other
Indemnified Persons for, and will pay to Buyer, the Company, and the other Indemnified Persons the
amount of, any Damages (including costs of cleanup, containment, or other remediation) arising,
directly or indirectly, from or in connection with:

          (a) any Environmental, Health, and Safety Liabilities arising out of or relating to: (i) (A)
the ownership, operation, or condition at any time on or prior to the Closing Date of the
Facilities or any other properties and assets (whether real, personal, or mixed and whether
tangible or intangible) in which Seller or the Company has or had an interest, or (B) any Hazardous
Materials or other contaminants that were present on the Facilities at any time on or prior to the
Closing Date; or (ii) (A) any Hazardous Materials or other contaminants, wherever located, that
were, or were allegedly, generated, transported, stored, treated, Released, or otherwise handled by
Seller or the Company or by any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible
at any time on or prior to the Closing Date, or (B) any Hazardous Activities that were, or were
allegedly, conducted by Seller or the Company or by any other Person for whose conduct they are or
may be held responsible; or

45



 

          (b) any bodily injury (including illness, disability, and death, and regardless of when any
such bodily injury occurred, was incurred, or manifested itself), personal injury, property damage
(including trespass, nuisance, wrongful eviction, and deprivation of the use of real property), or
other damage of or to any Person, including any employee or former employee of Seller or the
Company or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible, in any way
arising from or allegedly arising from any Hazardous Activity conducted or allegedly conducted with
respect to the Facilities or the operation of the Company prior to the Closing Date, or from
Hazardous Material that was (i) present or suspected to be present on or before the Closing Date on
or at the Facilities (or present or suspected to be present on any other property, if such
Hazardous Material emanated or allegedly emanated from any of the Facilities and was present or
suspected to be present on any of the Facilities on or prior to the Closing Date) or (ii) Released
or allegedly Released by Seller or the Company or any other Person for whose conduct they are or
may be held responsible, at any time on or prior to the Closing Date.

Buyer and Seller will be entitled to jointly control any Cleanup, any related Proceeding, and,
except as provided in the following sentence, any other Proceeding with respect to which indemnity
may be sought under this Section 10.3. The procedure described in Section 10.8 will apply to any
claim solely for monetary damages relating to a matter covered by this Section 10.3.

     10.4 INDEMNIFICATION AND PAYMENT OF DAMAGES BY BUYER

          Subject to the limitations of Section 10.7, Buyer will indemnify and hold harmless Seller, and
will pay to Seller the amount of any Damages (including costs of cleanup, containment, or other
remediation) arising, directly or indirectly, from or in connection with:

          (a) any Breach of any representation or warranty made by Buyer in this Agreement or in any
certificate delivered by Buyer pursuant to this Agreement;

          (b) any Breach by Buyer of any covenant or obligation of Buyer in this Agreement;

          (c) any claim by any Person for brokerage or finder’s fees or commissions or similar payments
based upon any agreement or understanding alleged to have been made by such Person with Buyer (or
any Person acting on its behalf) in connection with any of the Contemplated Transactions; 

          (d) any Environmental, Health, and Safety Liabilities arising out of or relating to: (i) (A)
the operation, or condition of the Facilities after the Closing Date, or (B) any Hazardous
Materials or other contaminants that are present at the Facilities after the Closing Date; or (ii)
(A) any Hazardous Materials or other contaminants, located on the Facilities, that are, or are
allegedly, generated, transported, stored, treated, Released, or otherwise handled by Buyer or the
Company or by any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible at any time
after the Closing Date, or (B) any Hazardous Activities that are, or are allegedly, conducted by
Buyer or the Company at the Facilities or by any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be
held responsible after the Closing Date;

46



 

          (e) any bodily injury (including illness, disability, and death, and regardless of when any
such bodily injury (including illness, disability, and death, and regardless of when any such
bodily injury occurred, was incurred, or manifested itself), personal injury, property damage
(including trespass, nuisance, wrongful eviction, and deprivation of the use of real property), or
other damage of or to any Person, including any employee or former employee of Buyer or the Company
or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible, in any way arising from
or allegedly arising from any Hazardous Activity conducted or allegedly conducted with respect to
the Facilities or the operation of the Company after the Closing Date, or from Hazardous Material
that are (i) present or suspected to be present after the Closing Date on or at the Facilities (or
present or suspected to be present on any other property, if such Hazardous Material emanated or
allegedly emanated from the Facilities and are present or suspected to be present on any of the
Facilities after the Closing Date) or (ii) Released or allegedly Released by Buyer or the Company
or any other Person for whose conduct they are or may be held responsible, at any time after the
Closing Date.

          The indemnification provided by Buyer to Seller in Sections 10.4(d) and (e) shall in no way
negate or relieve Seller from the indemnification provided to Buyer under Section 10.3 hereof for
any matter of which Seller had Knowledge or which was caused by Seller or the Company prior to the
Closing Date.

     10.5 TIME LIMITATIONS

          If the Closing occurs, Seller will have no liability (for indemnification or otherwise) with
respect to any representation or warranty, or covenant or obligation to be performed and complied
with prior to the Closing Date, other than those in Sections 3.3, 3.11, 3.13, or 5.9 unless on or
before January 2, 2008, Buyer notifies Seller of a claim specifying the factual basis of that claim
in reasonable detail to the extent then known by Buyer; a claim with respect to Section 3.3, 3.11,
3.13, or 5.9 or a claim for indemnification or reimbursement not based upon any representation or
warranty or any covenant or obligation to be performed and complied with prior to the Closing Date,
may be made on or before January 15, 2011.

          If the Closing occurs, Buyer will have no liability (for indemnification or otherwise) with
respect to any representation or warranty, or covenant or obligation to be performed and complied
with prior to the Closing Date, unless on or before January 2, 2008, Seller notifies Buyer of a
claim specifying the factual basis of that claim in reasonable detail to the extent then known by
Seller, provided, however, Buyer’s obligations to Seller under the Section 338(h)(10) Elections may
be made on or prior to January 15, 2011.

     10.6 LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT—SELLER

          Seller will have no liability (for indemnification or otherwise) with respect to the matters
described in clause (a), clause (b), to the extent relating to any failure to perform or comply
prior to the Closing Date, clause (c), or clause (d) of Section 10.2 until the total of all Damages
with respect to such matters exceeds $150,000, and then, only for Damages in excess of $150,000.
In no event shall the aggregate indemnification to be provided by Seller for claims under Section
10.2(a)-

47



 

(d) exceed the amount of $15,000,000, provided, however, with respect to claims resulting
from any Breach of any representation or warranty set forth in Sections 3.3, 3.11, 3.13, or from any Breach of any covenant or warranty
in Section 5.9 hereof, the obligation of Seller to pay Damages under Section 10.2 shall be limited
to the amount of the Purchase Price in Section 2.2. However, this Section 10.6 will not apply to
claims of which Seller had Knowledge at any time prior to the date on which such representation and
warranty is made or any intentional breach by Seller of any covenant or obligation.

     10.7 LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT—BUYER

          Buyer will have no liability (for indemnification or otherwise) with respect to the matters
described in Section 10.4 until the total of all Damages with respect to such matters exceeds
$150,000, and then, only for Damages in excess of $150,000. In no event shall the aggregate
indemnification to be provided by Buyer pursuant to the matters described in Section 10.4 exceed
$15,000,000. However, this Section 10.7 will not apply to any Breach of any of Buyer’s
representations and warranties of which Buyer had Knowledge at any time prior to the date on which
such representation and warranty is made or any intentional Breach by Buyer of any covenant or
obligation, and Buyer will be liable for all Damages with respect to such Breaches. The additional
Purchase Price due to Seller, if any, under Section 2.6 hereof shall not be subject to this Section
10.7.

     10.8 PROCEDURE FOR INDEMNIFICATION—THIRD PARTY CLAIMS

          (a) Promptly after receipt by an indemnified party under Section 10.2, 10.4, or (to the extent
provided in the last sentence of Section 10.3) Section 10.3 of notice of the commencement of any
Proceeding against it, such indemnified party will, if a claim is to be made against an
indemnifying party under such Section, give notice to the indemnifying party of the commencement of
such claim, but the failure to notify the indemnifying party will not relieve the indemnifying
party of any liability that it may have to any indemnified party, except to the extent that the
indemnifying party demonstrates that the defense of such action is prejudiced by the indemnifying
party’s failure to give such notice.

          (b) If any Proceeding referred to in Section 10.8(a) is brought against an indemnified party
and it gives notice to the indemnifying party of the commencement of such Proceeding, the
indemnifying party will, unless the claim involves Taxes, be entitled to participate in such
Proceeding and, to the extent that it wishes (unless (i) the indemnifying party is also a party to
such Proceeding and the indemnified party determines in good faith that joint representation would
be inappropriate, or (ii) the indemnifying party fails to provide reasonable assurance to the
indemnified party of its financial capacity to defend such Proceeding and provide indemnification
with respect to such Proceeding), to assume the defense of such Proceeding with counsel
satisfactory to the indemnified party and, after notice from the indemnifying party to the
indemnified party of its election to assume the defense of such Proceeding, the indemnifying party
will not, as long as it diligently conducts such defense, be liable to the indemnified party under
this Section 10 for any fees of other counsel or any other expenses with respect to the defense of
such Proceeding, in each case subsequently incurred by the indemnified party in connection with the
defense of such Proceeding, other than reasonable costs of investigation. If the indemnifying party
assumes the defense of a

48



 

Proceeding, (i) it will be conclusively established for purposes of this
Agreement that the claims made in that Proceeding are within the scope of and subject to
indemnification; (ii) no compromise or settlement of such claims may be effected by the indemnifying party without the indemnified
party’s consent unless (A) there is no finding or admission of any violation of Legal Requirements
or any violation of the rights of any Person and no effect on any other claims that may be made
against the indemnified party, and (B) the sole relief provided is monetary damages that are paid
in full by the indemnifying party; and (iii) the indemnified party will have no liability with
respect to any compromise or settlement of such claims effected without its consent. If notice is
given to an indemnifying party of the commencement of any Proceeding and the indemnifying party
does not, within ten days after the indemnified party’s notice is given, give notice to the
indemnified party of its election to assume the defense of such Proceeding, the indemnifying party
will be bound by any determination made in such Proceeding or any compromise or settlement effected
by the indemnified party.

          (c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an indemnified party determines in good faith that there
is a reasonable probability that a Proceeding may adversely affect it or its affiliates other than
as a result of monetary damages for which it would be entitled to indemnification under this
Agreement, the indemnified party may, by notice to the indemnifying party, assume the exclusive
right to defend, compromise, or settle such Proceeding, but the indemnifying party will not be
bound by any determination of a Proceeding so defended or any compromise or settlement effected
without its consent (which may not be unreasonably withheld).

          (d) Seller hereby consent to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of any court in which a Proceeding
is brought against any Indemnified Person for purposes of any claim that an Indemnified Person may
have under this Agreement with respect to such Proceeding or the matters alleged therein, and agree
that process may be served on Seller with respect to such a claim anywhere in the world.

     10.9 PROCEDURE FOR INDEMNIFICATION—OTHER CLAIMS

          A claim for indemnification for any matter not involving a third-party claim may be asserted
by notice to the party from whom indemnification is sought.

11. GENERAL PROVISIONS

     11.1 EXPENSES

          Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement, each party to this Agreement will
bear its respective expenses incurred in connection with the preparation, execution, and
performance of this Agreement and the Contemplated Transactions, including all fees and expenses of
agents, representatives, counsel, and accountants. Buyer will pay all amounts payable to its
investment banker in connection with this Agreement and the Contemplated Transactions. Buyer will
pay all of the HSR Act filing fee and all expenses associated therewith. Buyer and Seller will each
pay their own expenses related to the Contemplated Transaction. In the event of termination of

49



 

this Agreement, the obligation of each party to pay its own expenses will be subject to any rights
of such party arising from a breach of this Agreement by another party.

     11.2 PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS

          Any public announcement or similar publicity with respect to this Agreement or the
Contemplated Transactions will be issued, if at all, at such time and in such manner as Buyer and
Seller mutually determines. Unless consented to by the other, in advance or required by Legal
Requirements, prior to the Closing Seller and Buyer shall, and shall cause the Company to, keep
this Agreement strictly confidential and may not make any disclosure of this Agreement to any
Person. Seller and Buyer will consult with each other concerning the means by which the Company’s
employees, customers, and suppliers and others having dealings with the Company will be informed of
the Contemplated Transactions, and Seller and Buyer will have the right to be present for any such
communication.

     11.3 CONFIDENTIALITY

          Between the date of this Agreement and the Closing Date, Buyer and Seller will maintain in
confidence, and will cause the directors, officers, employees, agents, and advisors of Buyer and
the Company to maintain in confidence, any written, oral, or other information obtained in
confidence from another party or the Company in connection with this Agreement or the Contemplated
Transactions, unless (a) such information is already known to such party or to others not bound by
a duty of confidentiality or such information becomes publicly available through no fault of such
party, (b) the use of such information is necessary or appropriate in making any filing or
obtaining any consent or approval required for the consummation of the Contemplated Transactions,
or (c) the furnishing or use of such information is required by [or necessary or appropriate in
connection with] legal proceedings.

          If the Contemplated Transactions are not consummated, each party will return or destroy as
much of such written information as the other party may reasonably request. Whether or not the
Closing takes place, Seller waives, and will upon Buyer’s request cause the Company to waive, any
cause of action, right, or claim arising out of the access of Buyer or its representatives to any
trade secrets or other confidential information of the Company except for the intentional
competitive misuse by Buyer of such trade secrets or confidential information.

     11.4 NOTICES

          All notices, consents, waivers, and other communications under this Agreement must be in
writing and will be deemed to have been duly given when (a) delivered by hand (with written
confirmation of receipt), (b) sent by telecopier (with written confirmation of receipt), provided
that a copy is mailed by registered mail, return receipt requested, or (c) when received by the
addressee, if sent by a nationally recognized overnight delivery service (receipt requested), in
each case to the appropriate addresses and telecopier numbers set forth below (or to such other
addresses and telecopier numbers as a party may designate by notice to the other parties):

50



 





 
 
 




Seller:

 
Joe Van Matre


 

 
201 Rivergate Drive


 

 
Lafayette, LA 70508


 
 
 


with a copy to:

 
Henry C. Perret, Jr.


 

 
Perret Doise, APLC


 

 
P. O. Drawer 3408


 

 
Lafayette, LA 70502


 

 
Facsimile: (337) 262-9001


 

 
Email: hperret@perretdoise.com


 
 
 


 

 
and to


 
 
 


 

 
James J. Adams


 

 
1030 Lafayette Street


 

 
Lafayette, LA 70501


 

 
Facsimile: (337) 234-0375


 

 
Email: fouadam@earthlink.net


 
 
 


Buyer:

 
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


 

 
5075 Westheimer, Suite 890


 

 
Houston, Texas 77056


 

 
Attention: Theodore F. Pound III


 

 
Facsimile: (713) 369-0555


 

 
Email: tpound@alchenergy.com




     11.5 JURISDICTION; SERVICE OF PROCESS

          Any action or proceeding seeking to enforce any provision of, or based on any right arising
out of, this Agreement may be brought against any of the parties in the courts of the State of
Texas, County of Harris, or, if it has or can acquire jurisdiction, in the United States District
Court for the Southern District of Texas, and each of the parties consents to the jurisdiction of
such courts (and of the appropriate appellate courts) in any such action or proceeding and waives
any objection to venue laid therein. Process in any action or proceeding referred to in the
preceding sentence may be served on any party anywhere in the world.

     11.6 FURTHER ASSURANCES

          The parties agree (a) to furnish upon request to each other such further information, (b) to
execute and deliver to each other such other documents, and (c) to do such other acts and things,
all as the other party may reasonably request for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this
Agreement and the documents referred to in this Agreement.

     11.7 WAIVER

51



 

          The rights and remedies of the parties to this Agreement are cumulative and not alternative.
Neither the failure nor any delay by any party in exercising any right, power, or privilege under
this Agreement or the documents referred to in this Agreement will operate as a waiver of such
right, power, or privilege, and no single or partial exercise of any such right, power, or
privilege will preclude any other or further exercise of such right, power, or privilege or the
exercise of any other right, power, or privilege. To the maximum extent permitted by applicable
law, (a) no claim or right arising out of this Agreement or the documents referred to in this
Agreement can be discharged by one party, in whole or in part, by a waiver or renunciation of the
claim or right unless in writing signed by the other party; (b) no waiver that may be given by a
party will be applicable except in the specific instance for which it is given; and (c) no notice
to or demand on one party will be deemed to be a waiver of any obligation of such party or of the
right of the party giving such notice or demand to take further action without notice or demand as
provided in this Agreement or the documents referred to in this Agreement.

     11.8 ENTIRE AGREEMENT AND MODIFICATION

          This Agreement supersedes all prior agreements between the parties with respect to its subject
matter (including the Letter of Intent between Buyer and Seller dated September 21, 2005) and
constitutes (along with the documents referred to in this Agreement) a complete and exclusive
statement of the terms of the agreement between the parties with respect to its subject matter.
This Agreement may not be amended except by a written agreement executed by the party to be charged
with the amendment.

     11.9 DISCLOSURE LETTER

          In the event of any inconsistency between the statements in the body of this Agreement and
those in the Disclosure Letter (other than an exception expressly set forth as such in the
Disclosure Letter with respect to a specifically identified representation or warranty), the
statements in the body of this Agreement will control.

     11.10 ASSIGNMENTS, SUCCESSORS, AND NO THIRD-PARTY RIGHTS

          Neither party may assign any of its rights under this Agreement without the prior consent of
the other parties, except that Buyer may assign any of its rights under this Agreement to any
Subsidiary of Buyer. Subject to the preceding sentence, this Agreement will apply to, be binding in
all respects upon, and inure to the benefit of the successors and permitted assigns of the parties.
Nothing expressed or referred to in this Agreement will be construed to give any Person other than
the parties to this Agreement any legal or equitable right, remedy, or claim under or with respect
to this Agreement or any provision of this Agreement. This Agreement and all of its provisions and
conditions are for the sole and exclusive benefit of the parties to this Agreement and their
successors and assigns.

     11.11 SEVERABILITY

52



 

          If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the other provisions of this Agreement will remain in full force and effect. Any
provision of this Agreement held invalid or unenforceable only in part or degree will remain in
full force and effect to the extent not held invalid or unenforceable.

     11.12 SECTION HEADINGS, CONSTRUCTION

          The headings of Sections in this Agreement are provided for convenience only and will not
affect its construction or interpretation. All references to “Section” or “Sections” refer to the
corresponding Section or Sections of this Agreement. All words used in this Agreement will be
construed to be of such gender or number as the circumstances require. Unless otherwise expressly
provided, the word “including” does not limit the preceding words or terms.

     11.13 TIME OF ESSENCE

          With regard to all dates and time periods set forth or referred to in this Agreement, time is
of the essence.

     11.14 GOVERNING LAW

          This Agreement will be governed by the laws of the State of Texas without regard to conflicts
of laws principles.

     11.15 COUNTERPARTS

          This Agreement may be executed in one or more counterparts, each of which will be deemed to be
an original copy of this Agreement and all of which, when taken together, will be deemed to
constitute one and the same agreement.

[Remainder of page intentionally left blank.]

53



 

     IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed and delivered this Agreement as of the date
first written above.





 
 
 
 
 




BUYER:
 
ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY INC.,


 
 
a Delaware corporation


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
By:       /s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah


 
 
 


 

 
 
 
Munawar H. Hidayatallah


 

 
 
 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


 
 
 
 
 


SELLER:
 
JOE VAN MATRE


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
/s/ Joe Van Matre


 
 
 




54






EX-21.1
3
h34263exv21w1.htm
SUBSIDIARIES OF REGISTRANT



exv21w1



 

EXHIBIT 21.1.

SUBSIDIARIES






 
 
 




 

 
State


 

 
in which


 

 
Subsidiary


Name

 
Organized


 

 
 


 
 
 


AirComp LLC

 
Texas


Mountain Compressed Air Inc.

 
Texas


Strata Directional Technology, Inc.

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services, Inc.

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Rental Tools, Inc.

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc.

 
Texas


OilQuip Rentals, Inc.

 
Delaware


Target Energy Inc.

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers Management LP

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers LP, LLC

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers GP, LLC

 
Delaware











EX-31.1
4
h34263exv31w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CEO PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w1



 

 

EXHIBIT 31.1

 

CERTIFICATIONS

 

    I, Munawar Hidayatallah, Chief Executive Officer of the Company,
    certify that:

 

    1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.:

 

    2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any
    untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
    fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
    circumstances under which such statements were made, not
    misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;

 

    3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and
    other financial information included in this report, fairly
    present in all material respects the financial condition,
    results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of,
    and for, the periods presented in this report;

 

    4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are
    responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls
    and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(e)
    and
    15d-15(e))
    for the registrant and have:

 

    (a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or
    caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed
    under our supervision, to ensure that material information
    relating to the registrant, including its consolidated
    subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
    entities, particularly during the period in which this report is
    being prepared;

 

    (b) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s
    disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report
    our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure
    controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by
    this report based on such evaluation;

 

    (c) Disclosed in this report any change in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that
    occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter
    (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
    annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
    likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal
    control over financial reporting; and

 

    5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I
    have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal
    control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
    auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board
    of directors:

 

    (a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in
    the design or operation of internal control over financial
    reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
    registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and
    report financial information; and

 

    (b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves
    management or other employees who have a significant role in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.

 







 
    BY: 


/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH






    MUNAWAR H. HIDAYATALLAH




    CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

 

    DATE: March 22, 2006








EX-31.2
5
h34263exv31w2.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CFO PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w2



 


EXHIBIT 31.2

 

CERTIFICATIONS

 

    I, Victor M. Perez, Chief Financial Officer of the Company,
    certify that:

 

    1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.;

 

    2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any
    untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
    fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
    circumstances under which such statements were made, not
    misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;

 

    3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and
    other financial information included in this report, fairly
    present in all material respects the financial condition,
    results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of,
    and for, the periods presented in this report;

 

    4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are
    responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls
    and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(e)
    and
    15d-15(e))
    for the registrant and have:

 

    (a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or
    caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed
    under our supervision, to ensure that material information
    relating to the registrant, including its consolidated
    subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
    entities, particularly during the period in which this report is
    being prepared;

 

    (b) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s
    disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report
    our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure
    controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by
    this report based on such evaluation; and

 

    (c) Disclosed in this report any change in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that
    occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter
    (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
    annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
    likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal
    control over financial reporting;

 

    5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I
    have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal
    control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
    auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board
    of directors:

 

    (a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in
    the design or operation of internal control over financial
    reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
    registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and
    report financial information; and

 

    (b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves
    management or other employees who have a significant role in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.

 







 
    BY: 


/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ






    VICTOR M. PEREZ




    CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

 

    DATE: March 22, 2006








EX-32.1
6
h34263exv32w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CEO AND CFO PURSUANT TO SECTION 906



exv32w1



 


EXHIBIT 32.1

 

CERTIFICATION
    PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
    AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
    SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002

 

    In connection with the Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.(the “Company”) for the
    period ended December 31, 2005, as filed with the
    Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the
    “Report”), the undersigned hereby certify, pursuant to
    18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:

 

    (1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of
    Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
    1934; and

 

    (2) The information contained in the Report fairly
    presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and
    results of the operations of the Company.

 







 
    BY: 


/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH






    MUNAWAR H. HIDAYATALLAH




    CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

 

    DATE: March 22, 2006

 







 
    BY: 


/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ






    VICTOR M. PEREZ




    CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

 

    DATE: March 22, 2006








-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
