-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 WiBrFT8lEu8zIRPhcHJUHmslQTCZxHPb8rqi+z0KB4jJRjwyjPBFifcRPkLoIll0
 tayf+5/50lsdMPNDLcoijA==

0000950129-07-001381.txt : 20070315
0000950129-07-001381.hdr.sgml : 20070315
20070315150641
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0000950129-07-001381
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		7
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20061231
FILED AS OF DATE:		20070315
DATE AS OF CHANGE:		20070315

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			Allis Chalmers Energy Inc.
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000003982
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	OIL, GAS FIELD SERVICES, NBC [1389]
		IRS NUMBER:				390126090
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			DE
		FISCAL YEAR END:			1231

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-02199
		FILM NUMBER:		07696312

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056
		BUSINESS PHONE:		713-369-0550

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS CORP
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19920703

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS MANUFACTURING CO
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19710614


10-K
1
h44611e10vk.htm
FORM 10-K



e10vk



Table of Contents



 

UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND
    EXCHANGE COMMISSION


Washington, D.C.
    20549

 

Form 10-K

 



  
  
  



(Mark One)
    


 


 





þ
    



 


ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d)
    OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934




 


 


FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED
    DECEMBER 31, 2006





    OR






o
    



 


TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d)
    OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934




 


 


FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD
    FROM          TO






 

Commission file number 1-2199

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY
    INC.


(Exact name of registrant as
    specified in its charter)

 



  
  
  



Delaware


 


39-0126090




(State or other jurisdiction
    of
    incorporation or organization)


 


(I.R.S. Employer
    Identification No.)




 


 


 




5075 WESTHEIMER,
    SUITE 890
    HOUSTON, TEXAS
(Address of principal
    executive offices)


 


77056
(Zip code) 





 

(713) 369-0550


Registrant’s telephone
    number, including area code

 

SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE
    ACT:

 



  
  
  




Title of Security:



 



Name of Exchange:




 




Common Stock, par value
    $0.01 per share
    


 


American Stock Exchange
    





 

SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(g) OF THE
    ACT:

 

NONE

 

    Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
    seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities
    Act.  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
    reports pursuant to Section 13 or
    15(d).  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed
    all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of
    the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding
    12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
    was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
    subject to such filing requirements for the past
    90 days.  Yes þ     No o
    

 

    Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
    pursuant to ITEM 405 of
    Regulation S-K
    is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
    of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
    information statements incorporated by reference in
    Part III of this
    Form 10-K
    or any amendment to this
    Form 10-K.  o
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
    accelerated filer, an accelerated filer or a non-accelerated
    filer. See definition of “accelerated filer” and
    “large accelerated filer” in
    Rule 12b-2
    of the Exchange Act (Check one):

 

    Large accelerated
    filer o     Accelerated
    filer þ     Non-accelerated
    filer o
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
    (as defined in
    Rule 12b-2
    of the Exchange
    Act).  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    The aggregate market value of the common equity held by
    non-affiliates of the registrant, computed using the closing
    price of the common stock of $13.59 per share on June 30,
    2006, as reported on the American Stock Exchange, was
    approximately $139,745,249 (affiliates included for this
    computation only: directors, executive officers and holders of
    more than 5% of the registrant’s common stock).

 

    As of March 1, 2007 there were 34,251,443 shares of
    common stock issued and outstanding.

 

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:

 

    Certain information called for by
    Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of Part III will
    be included in an amendment to this annual report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from the registrant’s
    definitive proxy statement for its 2007 annual meeting of
    stockholders.

 






 







 

TABLE OF
    CONTENTS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


Page



 





PART I






Item 1.



 


Business


 




5
    







Item 1A.



 


Risk
    Factors


 




13
    







Item 1B.



 


Unresolved Staff
    Comments


 




26
    







Item 2.



 


Properties


 




27
    







Item 3.



 


Legal
    Proceedings


 




27
    







Item 4.



 


Submission of
    Matters to a Vote of Security Holders


 




29
    






 





PART II





 


 


 


 




 







Item 5.



 


Market for
    Registrant’s Common Equity and Related Stockholder
    Matters


 




29
    







Item 6.



 


Selected Financial
    Data


 




32
    







Item 7.



 


Management’s
    Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
    Operations


 




32
    







Item 7A.



 


Quantitative and
    Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk


 




47
    







Item 8.



 


Financial
    Statements


 




48
    







Item 9.



 


Changes in and
    Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial
    Disclosure


 




92
    







Item 9A.



 


Controls and
    Procedures


 




92
    







Item 9B.



 


Other
    Information


 




92
    






 





PART III





 


 


 


 




 







Item 10.



 


Directors and
    Executive Officers of the Registrant


 




93
    







Item 11.



 


Executive
    Compensation


 




93
    







Item 12.



 


Security Ownership
    of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management


 




93
    







Item 13.



 


Certain
    Relationships and Related Transactions


 




93
    







Item 14.



 


Principal
    Accountant Fees and Services


 




93
    






 





PART IV





 


 


 


 




 







Item 15.



 


Exhibits and
    Financial Statement Schedules


 




93
    







Signatures and
    Certifications



 




95
    




 Subsidiaries
 Consent of UHY LLP
 Certification of CEO Pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of CFO Pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of CEO & CFO Pursuant to Section 302








    2



Table of Contents


DEFINITIONS

 








    “air drilling” 


    A technique in which oil, natural gas, or geothermal wells are
    drilled by creating a pressure within the well that is lower
    than the reservoir pressure. The result is increased rate of
    penetration, reduced formation damage and reduced drilling costs.

 


    “blow out preventors” 


    A large safety device placed on the surface of an oil or natural
    gas well to maintain high pressure well bores.

 


    “booster” 


    A machine that increases the pressure
    and/or
    volume of air when used in conjunction with a compressor or a
    group of compressors.

 


    “capillary tubing” 


    A small diameter tubing installed in producing wells and through
    which chemicals are injected to enhance production and reduce
    corrosion and other problems.

 


    “casing” 


    A pipe placed in a drilled well to secure the well bore and
    formation.

 


    “choke manifolds” 


    An arrangement of pipes, valves and special valves on the rig
    floor that controls pressure during drilling by diverting
    pressure away from the blow-out preventors and the annulus of
    the well.

 


    “coiled tubing” 


    A small diameter tubing used to service producing and
    problematic wells and to work in high pressure applications
    during drilling, production and workover operations.

 


    “directional drilling” 


    The technique of drilling a well while varying the angle of
    direction of a well and changing the direction of a well to hit
    a specific target.

 


    “double studded adapter” 


    A device that joins two dissimilar connections on certain
    equipment, including valves, piping and blow-out preventers.

 


    “drill pipe” 


    A pipe that attaches to the drill bit to drill a well.

 


    “spiral heavy weight drill pipe” 


    A heavy drill pipe used for special applications primarily in
    directional drilling. The “spiral” design increases
    flexibility and penetration of the pipe.

 


    “horizontal drilling” 


    The technique of drilling wells at a
    90-degree
    angle.

 


    “laydown machines” 


    A truck mounted machine used to move drill pipe, casing and
    tubing onto a pipe rack (from which a derrick crane lifts the
    drill pipe, casing and tubing and inserts it into the well).

 


    “land drilling rig” 


    Composed of a drawworks or hoist, a derrick, a power plant,
    rotating equipment and pumps to circulate the drilling fluid and
    the drill string.

 


    “logging-while-drilling” 


    The technique of measuring, in real time, the formation pressure
    and the position of equipment inside of a well.

 


    “measurement-while-drilling” 


    The technique used to measure direction and angle while drilling
    a well.

 


    “mist pump” 


    A drilling pump that uses mist as the circulation medium for
    injecting small amounts of foaming agent, corrosion agent and
    other chemical solutions into the well.

 


    “pulling rig” 


    A type of well-servicing rig used to pull downhole equipment,
    such as tubing, rods or the pumps from a well, and replace them
    when  




    3



Table of Contents












    necessary. A pulling rig is also used to set downhole tools and
    perform lighter jobs.

 


    “spacer spools” 


    High pressure connections or links which are stacked to elevate
    the blow out preventors to the drilling rig floor.

 


    “straight-hole drilling” 


    The technique of drilling that allows very little or no vertical
    deviation.

 


    “test plugs” 


    A device used to test the connections of well heads and the blow
    out preventors.

 


    “torque turn service” or “torque turn
    equipment” 


    A monitoring device to insure proper makeup of the casing.

 


    “tubing” 


    A pipe placed inside the casing to allow the well to produce.

 


    “tubing work strings” 


    The tubing used on workover rigs through which high pressure
    liquids, gases or mixtures are pumped into a well to perform
    production operations.

 


    “wear bushings” 


    A device placed inside a wellhead to protect the wellhead from
    wear.

 


    “workover rigs” 


    Similar to a land drilling rig, however, they are smaller than
    the drilling rig for the same depth of well. These rigs are used
    to complete the drilled wells or to repair them whenever
    necessary.




    4



Table of Contents


SPECIAL
    NOTE
    REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

 

    This annual report contains forward-looking statements within
    the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933,
    as amended, or the Securities Act, regarding our business,
    financial condition, results of operations and prospects. Words
    such as expects, anticipates, intends, plans, believes, seeks,
    estimates and similar expressions or variations of such words
    are intended to identify forward-looking statements. However,
    these are not the exclusive means of identifying forward-looking
    statements. Although such forward-looking statements reflect our
    good faith judgment, such statements can only be based on facts
    and factors currently known to us. Consequently, forward-looking
    statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties,
    and actual outcomes may differ materially from the results and
    outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. Further
    information about the risks and uncertainties that may impact us
    are described in “Risk Factors” beginning on
    page 13 of this annual report. You should read those
    sections carefully. You should not place undue reliance on
    forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of
    this annual report. We undertake no obligation to update
    publicly any forward-looking statements in order to reflect any
    event or circumstance occurring after the date of this annual
    report or currently unknown facts or conditions or the
    occurrence of unanticipated events.


 

PART I.



 







ITEM 1.  


BUSINESS




 

    We provide services and equipment to oil and natural gas
    exploration and production companies, domestically in Texas,
    Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah,
    Wyoming, Arkansas, Alabama, West Virginia, offshore in the Gulf
    of Mexico, and internationally primarily in Argentina and
    Mexico. We operate in six sectors of the oil and natural gas
    service industry: rental tools, international drilling,
    directional drilling services; casing and tubing services;
    compressed air drilling services; and production services. Our
    central operating strategy is to provide high-quality,
    technologically advanced services and equipment. As a result of
    our commitment to customer service, we have developed strong
    relationships with many of the leading oil and natural gas
    companies, including both independents and majors.

 

    Our growth strategy is focused on identifying and pursuing
    opportunities in markets we believe are growing faster than the
    overall oilfield services industry in which we believe we can
    capitalize on our competitive strengths. Over the past several
    years, we have significantly expanded the geographic scope of
    our operations and the range of services we provide through
    organic growth and strategic acquisitions. Our organic growth
    has primarily been achieved through expanding our geographic
    scope, acquiring complementary property and equipment, hiring
    personnel to service new regions and cross-selling our products
    and services from existing operating locations. Since 2001, we
    have completed 19 acquisitions, including six in 2005 and five
    significant acquisitions in 2006.

 

    Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this annual
    report to “Allis-Chalmers,” “we”,
    “us”, “our” and “ours” refer to
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., together with its subsidiaries.

 

    Our annual reports on
    Form 10-K,
    quarterly reports on
    Form 10-Q,
    current reports on
    Form 8-K
    and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
    Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
    1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, are made available free
    of charge on our website at www.alchenergy.com as soon as
    reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish
    them to the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC.

 

    We have adopted a Code of Business Ethics and Conduct to provide
    guidance to our directors, officers and employees on matters of
    business ethics and conduct. Our Code of Business Ethics and
    Conduct is available on the investor relations section of our
    website.

 

    Information contained on or connected to our website is not
    incorporated by reference into this annual report on
    Form 10-K
    and should not be considered part of this report or any other
    filing we make with the SEC.

 

    Divisional and geographic financial information appears in
    “Item 8. Financial Information — Notes to
    Consolidated Financial Statements — Note 16.”



    5



Table of Contents

 

Our
    History

 







 
    • 


    We were incorporated in 1913 under Delaware law.


 

 
    • 


    We reorganized in bankruptcy in 1988 and sold all of our major
    businesses. From 1988 to May 2001 we had only one operating
    company in the equipment repair business.


 

 
    • 


    In May 2001, under new management we consummated a merger in
    which we acquired OilQuip Rentals, Inc., or OilQuip, and its
    wholly-owned subsidiary, Mountain Compressed Air, Inc., or
    Mountain Air.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2001, we sold Houston Dynamic Services, Inc., our
    last pre-bankruptcy business.


 

 
    • 


    In February 2002, we acquired approximately 81% of the capital
    stock of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services Inc., or Tubular,
    formerly known as Jens’ Oilfield Service, Inc. and
    substantially all of the capital stock of Strata Directional
    Technology, Inc., or Strata.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2003, we entered into a limited liability company
    operating agreement with M-I L.L.C., or M-I, a joint venture
    between Smith International and Schlumberger N.V., to form a
    Delaware limited liability company named AirComp LLC, or
    AirComp. Pursuant to this agreement, we owned 55% and M-I owned
    45% of AirComp.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of the capital
    stock of Tubular.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2004, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc., or Safco.


 

 
    • 


    In November 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all of the
    assets of Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc. and Marquis Bit
    Co., LLC, which we refer to collectively as Diamond Air.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2004, we acquired Downhole Injection Services, LLC,
    or Downhole.


 

 
    • 


    In January 2005, we changed our name from Allis-Chalmers
    Corporation to Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


 

 
    • 


    In April 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Delta
    Rental Service, Inc., or Delta.


 

 
    • 


    In May 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Capcoil
    Tubing Services, Inc., or Capcoil.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2005, we acquired M-I’s interest in AirComp, and
    acquired the compressed air drilling assets of W. T.
    Enterprises, Inc., or W.T.


 

 
    • 


    Effective August 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock
    of Target Energy Inc., or Target.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing assets of
    IHS/Spindletop, a division of Patterson Services, Inc., a
    subsidiary of RPC, Inc.


 

 
    • 


    In January 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty Rental Tools, Inc., or Specialty.


 

 
    • 


    In February 2006, we merged Downhole into Capcoil and renamed
    the merged entity, Allis-Chalmers Production Services Inc. We
    also merged Specialty and Delta into Safco and renamed the
    merged entity, Allis-Chalmers Rental Tools, Inc. In
    December 2006, we renamed to Allis-Chalmers Rental Services Inc,
    or Rental.


 

 
    • 


    In April 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Rogers Oil Tool Services, Inc., or Rogers.


 

 
    • 


    In August 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of DLS
    Drilling, Logistics & Services Corporation, or DLS.


 

 
    • 


    In October 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Petro-Rentals, Incorporated, or Petro Rentals.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Tanus Argentina S.A., or Tanus.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2006, we acquired substantially all of the assets of
    Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc., or OGR.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2006, we merged Target into Strata and Rogers into
    Tubular.



 

    As a result of these transactions, our prior results may not be
    indicative of current or future operations of those sectors.



    6



Table of Contents

 

Industry
    Overview

 

    We provide products and services primarily to domestic onshore
    and offshore oil and natural gas exploration and production
    companies. The main factor influencing demand for our products
    and services is the level of drilling activity by oil and
    natural gas companies, which, in turn, depends largely on
    current and anticipated future crude oil and natural gas prices
    and production depletion rates. According to the Energy
    Information Agency of the U.S. Department of Energy, or
    EIA, from 1990 to 2005, demand for oil and natural gas in the
    United States grew at an average annual rate of 1.5%, while
    supply decreased at an average annual rate of just over 2%.
    Current industry forecasts suggest an increasing demand for oil
    and natural gas coupled with a flat or declining production
    curve, which we believe should result in the continuation of
    historically high crude oil and natural gas commodity prices.
    The EIA forecasts that U.S. oil and natural gas consumption
    will increase at an average annual rate of 1.4% and 1.3% through
    2025, respectively. Conversely, the EIA estimates that
    U.S. oil production will remain flat and natural gas
    production will increase at an average annual rate of 0.6%.

 

    We anticipate that oil and natural gas exploration and
    production companies will continue to increase capital spending
    for their exploration and drilling programs. In recent years,
    much of this expansion has focused on natural gas drilling
    activities. According to Baker Hughes rig count data, the
    average total rig count in the United States increased 91% from
    918 in 2000 to 1,752 as of March 2, 2007, while the average
    natural gas rig count increased 103% from 720 in 2000 to 1,458
    as of March 2, 2007. While the number of rigs drilling for
    natural gas has increased significantly since the beginning of
    1996, natural gas production has only increased by approximately
    1.5% over the same period of time. This is largely a function of
    increasing decline rates for natural gas wells in the United
    States. We believe that a continued increase in drilling
    activity will be required for the natural gas industry to help
    meet the expected increased demand for natural gas in the United
    States.

 

    We believe oil and natural gas producers are becoming
    increasingly focused on their core competencies in identifying
    reserves and reducing burdensome capital and maintenance costs.
    In addition, we believe our customers are currently
    consolidating their supplier bases to streamline their
    purchasing operations and benefit from economies of scale.

 

Competitive
    Strengths

 

    We believe the following competitive strengths will enable us to
    capitalize on future opportunities:

 

Strategic position in high growth markets.  We
    focus on markets we believe are growing faster than the overall
    oilfield services industry and in which we can capitalize on our
    competitive strengths. Pursuant to this strategy, we have become
    a significant provider of products and services in directional
    drilling, air drilling and production-related services employing
    coiled tubing and capillary tubing. We employ approximately
    85 full-time directional drillers, and we believe our
    ability to attract and retain experienced drillers has made us a
    leader in the segment. We also believe we are one of the largest
    air drillers based on amount of air drilling equipment. In
    addition, we have significant operations in what we believe will
    be among the higher growth oil and natural gas producing regions
    within the United States and internationally, including the
    Barnett Shale in North Texas, onshore and offshore Louisiana,
    the Piceance Basin in Southern Colorado, all five oil and
    natural gas producing regions in Mexico, and all five major oil
    and natural gas producing regions of Argentina.

 

Strong relationships with diversified customer
    base.  We have strong relationships with many of
    the major and independent oil and natural gas producers and
    service companies in Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado,
    Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah, Wyoming, Arkansas, offshore in the
    Gulf of Mexico, Argentina and Mexico. Our largest customers
    include Anadarko Petroleum, Apache Corporation, BHP-Billiton,
    BP, Chevron, ConocoPhilips, Dominion Resources, El Paso
    Corporation, Materiales y Equipo Petroleo, or Matyep, McMoran
    Oil & Gas, Murphy Oil, Newfield Exploration, Occidental
    Petroleum Corporation, Pan American Energy, Petrohawk Energy,
    Helix Energy Solutions Group, Repsol-YPF and Total Austral.
    Since 2002, we have broadened our customer base as a result of
    our acquisitions, technical expertise and reputation for quality
    customer service and by providing customers with technologically
    advanced equipment and highly skilled operating personnel.



    7



Table of Contents

 

Successful execution of growth strategy.  Over
    the past five years, we have grown both organically and through
    successful acquisitions of competing businesses. Since 2001, we
    have completed 19 acquisitions. We strive to improve the
    operating performance of our acquired businesses by increasing
    their asset utilization and operating efficiency. These
    acquisitions and organic growth have expanded our geographic
    presence and customer base and, in turn, have enabled us to
    cross-sell various products and services through our existing
    operating locations.

 

Diversified and increased cash flow
    sources.  We operate as a diversified oilfield
    service company through our six business segments. We believe
    that our product and service offerings and geographical presence
    through our six business segments provide us with diverse
    sources of cash flow. Our acquisition of DLS provides greater
    international presence coupled with relatively stable long-term
    drilling contracts. Our acquisition of Petro Rentals
    significantly enhances our production-related services and
    equipment, and our recent acquisition of substantially all the
    assets of OGR further expands our rental tools segment and
    increases our offshore and international operations.

 

Experienced management team.  Our executive
    management team has extensive experience in the energy sector,
    and consequently has developed strong and longstanding
    relationships with many of the major and independent exploration
    and production companies. We believe that our management team
    has demonstrated its ability to grow our businesses organically,
    make strategic acquisitions and successfully integrate these
    acquired businesses into our operations.

 

Business
    Strategy

 

    The key elements of our growth strategy include:

 

Mitigate cyclical risk through balanced
    operations.  We strive to mitigate cyclical risk
    in the oilfield service sector by balancing our operations
    between onshore versus offshore; drilling versus production;
    rental tools versus service; domestic versus international; and
    natural gas versus crude oil. We will continue to shape our
    organic and acquisition growth efforts to provide further
    balance across these five categories.

 

Expand geographically to provide greater access and service
    to key customer segments.  We have locations in
    Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma and Louisiana in order to
    enhance our proximity to customers and more efficiently serve
    their needs. Our acquisition of DLS expanded our geographic
    footprint into Argentina. We plan to continue to establish new
    locations in the United States and internationally.

 

Prudently pursue strategic acquisitions.  To
    complement our organic growth, we seek to opportunistically
    complete, at attractive valuations, strategic acquisitions that
    will be accretive to earnings, complement our products and
    services, expand our geographic footprint and market presence,
    and further diversify our customer base.

 

Expand products and services provided in existing operating
    locations.  Since the beginning of 2004, we have
    invested approximately $62.1 million in capital
    expenditures to grow our business organically by expanding our
    product and service offerings. This strategy is consistent with
    our belief that oil and natural gas producers more heavily favor
    integrated suppliers that can provide a broad product and
    service offering in many geographic locations.

 

Increase utilization of assets.  We seek to
    increase revenues and enhance margins by continuing to increase
    the utilization of our assets with new and existing customers.
    We expect to accomplish this through leveraging longstanding
    relationships with our customers and cross-selling our suite of
    services and equipment, while taking advantage of continued
    improvements in industry fundamentals. We also expect to
    continue to implement this strategy in our recently expanded
    rental tools segment, thus improving the utilization and
    profitability of this newly acquired business with minimal
    additional investment.

 

Business
    Segments

 

Rental Tools.  We provide specialized rental
    equipment, including premium drill pipe, spiral heavy weight
    drill pipe, tubing work strings, blow out preventors, choke
    manifolds and various valves and handling



    8



Table of Contents


    tools, for both onshore and offshore well drilling, completion
    and workover operations. Most wells drilled for oil and natural
    gas require some form of rental equipment in both the drilling
    and completion of a well. We have an inventory of specialized
    equipment, which includes double studded adapters, test plugs,
    wear bushings, adaptor spools, baskets, spacer spools and other
    assorted handling tools in various sizes to meet our
    customers’ demands. We charge customers for rental
    equipment on a daily basis. Our customers are liable for the
    cost of inspection, repairs and lost or damaged equipment. We
    currently provide rental equipment in Texas, Oklahoma,
    Louisiana, Mississippi, Colorado, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico
    and internationally in Malaysia, Colombia, Russia, Mexico and
    Canada.

 

    Our rental tools segment was established with the acquisition of
    Safco in September 2004 and of Delta in April 2005. We
    significantly expanded our rental tools segment in January 2006
    with the acquisition of Specialty. Specialty had been in the
    rental business for over 25 years, providing oil and
    natural gas operators and oilfield services companies with
    rental equipment. The acquisition of Specialty gave us a broader
    scope of rental equipment to offer our existing customer base,
    and allowed us to better compete in deep water drilling
    operations in the area of premium drill pipe and handling
    equipment. The acquisition of Specialty added new customer
    relationships and enhanced our relationships with key existing
    customers. In February 2006, we merged Specialty and Delta into
    Safco and named the entity, Allis-Chalmers Rental Tools, Inc.
    which we subsequently renamed Allis-Chalmers Rental Services,
    Inc. We further expanded this segment with the acquisition of
    substantially all the assets of OGR in December 2006. The assets
    we acquired included an extensive inventory of premium rental
    equipment, including drill pipe, spiral heavy weight drill pipe,
    tubing work strings, landing strings, blow out preventors, choke
    manifolds and various valves and handling tools for oil and
    natural gas drilling. Included in the acquisition were
    OGR’s facilities in Morgan City, Louisiana and Victoria,
    Texas.

 

International Drilling.  We provide drilling,
    completion, workover and related services for oil and natural
    gas wells. Headquartered in Buenos Aires, Argentina, DLS
    operates out of the San Jorge, Cuyan, Neuquén, Austral
    and Noroeste basins of Argentina. DLS also offers a wide variety
    of other oilfield services such as drilling fluids and
    completion fluids and engineering and logistics to complement
    its customers’ field organization.

 

    DLS operates a fleet of 51 rigs, including 20 drilling rigs, 18
    workover rigs and 12 pulling rigs in Argentina and one drilling
    rig in Bolivia. Argentine rig operations are generally conducted
    in remote regions of the country and require substantial
    infrastructure and support. As of March 1, 2007, all of
    DLS’ rig fleet was actively marketed, except for one
    drilling rig that is presently inactive and requires
    approximately $6.4 million in capital expenditures.

 

    DLS currently services several of the major and independent oil
    and natural gas producing companies in Argentina, including Pan
    American Energy, Repsol-YPF, Apache Corporation, Occidental
    Petroleum Corporation and Total Austral SA. Major competitors of
    DLS include Pride International, Inc., Servicios WellTech, S.A.,
    Ensign Energy Services Inc. (formerly ODE), Nabors Industries
    Ltd. and Helmerich & Payne, Inc.

 

Directional Drilling Services.  We utilize
    state-of-the-art
    equipment to provide well planning and engineering services,
    directional drilling packages, downhole motor technology, well
    site directional supervision, exploratory and development
    re-entry drilling, downhole guidance services and other drilling
    services to our customers. We also provide
    logging-while-drilling and measurement-while-drilling services.
    We have a team of approximately 85 full-time directional
    drillers and maintain a selection of approximately 160 drilling
    motors. According to Baker Hughes, as of March 2, 2007, 42%
    of all wells in the United States are drilled directionally
    and/or
    horizontally. Management believes directional drilling offers
    several advantages over conventional drilling including:

 







 
    • 


    improvement of total cumulative recoverable reserves;


 

 
    • 


    improved reservoir production performance beyond conventional
    vertical wells; and


 

 
    • 


    reduction of the number of field development wells.



 

    Our straight-hole motors offer opportunity to capture additional
    market share. We currently provide our directional drilling
    services in Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Colorado.



    9



Table of Contents

 

Casing and Tubing Services.  We provide
    specialized equipment and trained operators to perform a variety
    of pipe handling services, including installing casing and
    tubing, changing out drill pipe and retrieving production tubing
    for both onshore and offshore drilling and workover operations,
    which we refer to as casing and tubing services. All wells
    drilled for oil and natural gas require casing to be installed
    for drilling, and if the well is producing, tubing will be
    required in the completion phase. We currently provide casing
    and tubing services primarily in Texas, Louisiana and both
    onshore and offshore in the Gulf of Mexico and Mexico.

 

    We expanded our casing and tubing services in September 2005 by
    acquiring the casing and tubing assets of IHS/Spindletop, a
    division of Patterson Services, Inc., a subsidiary of RPC, Inc.
    We paid $15.7 million for RPC, Inc.’s casing and
    tubing assets, which consisted of casing and tubing installation
    equipment, including hammers, elevators, trucks, pickups, power
    units, laydown machines, casing tools and torque turn equipment.
    The acquisition of RPC, Inc.’s casing and tubing assets
    increased our capability in casing and tubing services and
    expanded our geographic capability. We opened new field offices
    in Corpus Christi, Texas, Kilgore, Texas, Lafayette, Louisiana
    and Houma, Louisiana. The acquisition allowed us to enter the
    East Texas and Louisiana market for casing and tubing services
    as well as offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. Additionally, the
    acquisition greatly expanded our premium tubing services.

 

    We expanded this segment again in April 2006 with the
    acquisition of Rogers for $13.7 million. Historically,
    Rogers rented, sold and serviced power drill pipe tongs and
    accessories and rental tongs for snubbing and well control
    applications and provided specialized tong operators for rental
    jobs. In December 2006, we merged Rogers into Tubular.

 

    We provide equipment used in casing and tubing services in
    Mexico to Matyep. Matyep provides equipment and services for
    offshore and onshore drilling operations to Petroleos Mexicanos,
    known as Pemex, in Villahermosa, Reynosa, Veracruz and Ciudad
    del Carmen, Mexico. Matyep provides all personnel, repairs,
    maintenance, insurance and supervision for provision of the
    casing and tubing crew and torque turn service. Services to
    offshore drilling operations in Mexico are traditionally
    seasonal, with less activity during the first quarter of each
    calendar year due to weather conditions.

 

    For the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, our
    Mexico operations accounted for approximately $6.5 million,
    $6.4 million and $5.1 million, respectively, of our
    revenues. We provide extended payment terms to Matyep and
    maintain a high accounts receivable balance due to these terms.
    The accounts receivable balance was approximately
    $3.2 million at December 31, 2006 and approximately
    $2.2 million at December 31, 2005. Tubular has been
    providing services to Pemex in association with Matyep since
    1997.

 

Compressed Air Drilling Services.  We provide
    compressed air equipment, chemicals and other specialized
    products for underbalanced drilling and production applications.
    With a combined fleet of over 175 compressors and boosters, we
    believe we are one of the world’s largest providers of
    compressed air or underbalanced drilling services in the United
    States. We also provide premium air hammers and bits to oil and
    natural gas companies for use in underbalanced drilling. Our
    broad and diversified product line enables us to compete in the
    underbalanced market with equipment and services packages
    engineered and customized to specifically meet customer
    requirements.

 

    Underbalanced drilling shortens the time required to drill a
    well and enhances production by minimizing formation damage.
    There is a trend in the industry to drill, complete and workover
    wells with underbalanced operations and we expect the market to
    continue to grow.

 

    In July 2005, we purchased the compressed air drilling assets of
    W. T., operating in West Texas and acquired the remaining 45%
    equity interest in AirComp from M-I. The acquired assets include
    air compressors, boosters, mist pumps, rolling stock and other
    equipment. These assets were integrated into AirComp’s
    assets and complement and add to AirComp’s product and
    service offerings. We currently provide compressed air drilling
    services in Alabama, Arkansas, Colorado, Mississippi, New
    Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, West Virginia and Wyoming.

 

Production Services.  We provide a variety of
    quality production-related rental tools and equipment and
    services, including wire line services, land and offshore
    pumping services and coil tubing. We also provide specialized
    equipment and trained operators to install and retrieve
    capillary tubing, through which chemicals are injected into
    producing wells to increase production and reduce corrosion.
    Chemicals are injected through



    10



Table of Contents


    the tubing to targeted zones up to depths of approximately
    20,000 feet. The result is improved production from
    treatment of downhole corrosion, scale, paraffin and salt
    build-up in
    producing wells. Natural gas wells with low bottom pressures can
    experience fluid accumulation in the tubing and well bore. This
    injection system can inject a foaming agent which lightens the
    fluids allowing them to flow out of the well. Additionally,
    corrosion inhibitors can be introduced to reduce corrosion in
    the well. In addition, we perform workover services with coiled
    tubing units. Our production services segment was established
    with the acquisition of Downhole, in December 2004, and the
    acquisition of Capcoil, in May 2005. In February 2006, we merged
    Downhole into Capcoil and named the new entity Allis-Chalmers
    Production Services, Inc., or Production Services. In October
    2006, we expanded our production services segment with the
    acquisition of Petro Rentals. Petro Rentals serves both the
    onshore and offshore markets, providing a variety of quality
    rental tools and equipment and services, with an emphasis on
    production-related equipment and services, including wire line
    services and equipment, land and offshore pumping services and
    coiled tubing.

 

    We have an inventory of specialized equipment consisting of
    capillary and coil tubing units in various sizes ranging from
    1/4”
    to
    11/4”
    along with nitrogen pumping and transportation equipment. We
    purchased two additional capillary units and two additional coil
    tubing units in 2006, one additional coil tubing unit was
    received in the first quarter of 2007 and an additional coil
    tubing unit is expected to be delivered by the end of the second
    quarter of 2007. The new coil tubing units range in size from
    11/4”
    to
    13/4”.
    We also maintain a full range of stainless and carbon steel
    coiled tubing and related supplies used in the installation of
    the tubing. We sell or rent the tubing and charge a fee for its
    installation, servicing and removal, which includes the service
    personnel and associated equipment on a turnkey or hourly basis.
    We do not provide the chemicals injected into the well. We
    currently provide production services in Texas, Louisiana,
    Oklahoma and Mexico.

 

Cyclical
    Nature Of Oilfield Services Industry

 

    The oilfield services industry is highly cyclical. The most
    critical factor in assessing the outlook for the industry is the
    worldwide supply and demand for oil and the domestic supply and
    demand for natural gas. The peaks and valleys of demand are
    further apart than those of many other cyclical industries. This
    is primarily a result of the industry being driven by commodity
    demand and corresponding price increases. As demand increases,
    producers raise their prices. The price escalation enables
    producers to increase their capital expenditures. The increased
    capital expenditures ultimately result in greater revenues and
    profits for services and equipment companies. The increased
    capital expenditures also ultimately result in greater
    production which historically has resulted in increased supplies
    and reduced prices.

 

    Demand for our services has been strong throughout 2004, 2005
    and 2006. Management believes demand will remain strong
    throughout 2007 due to high oil and natural gas prices and the
    capital expenditure plans of the exploration and production
    companies. Because of these market fundamentals for oil and
    natural gas, management believes the long-term trend of activity
    in our markets is favorable. However, these factors could be
    more than offset by other developments affecting the worldwide
    supply and demand for oil and natural gas products.

 

Customers

 

    In 2006, one of our customers, Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal
    Argentina, or Pan American Energy, represented 11.7% of our
    consolidated revenues. In 2005, none of our customers accounted
    for more than 10% of our revenues. Our primary customers are the
    major and independent oil and natural gas companies operating in
    the United States, Argentina and Mexico. In 2004, Matyep in
    Mexico represented 10.8% and Burlington Resources Inc.
    represented 10.1% of our consolidated revenues. The loss without
    replacement of our larger existing customers could have a
    material adverse effect on our results of operations.

 

Suppliers

 

    The equipment utilized in our business is generally available
    new from manufacturers or at auction. Currently, due to the high
    level of activity in the oilfield services industry, there is a
    high demand for new and used equipment. Consequently, there is a
    limited amount of many types of equipment available at auction
    and significant backlogs on new equipment. However, the cost of
    acquiring new equipment to expand our business could increase as
    a result of the high demand for equipment in the industry.



    11



Table of Contents

 

Competition

 

    We experience significant competition in all areas of our
    business. In general, the markets in which we compete are highly
    fragmented, and a large number of companies offer services that
    overlap and are competitive with our services and products. We
    believe that the principal competitive factors are technical and
    mechanical capabilities, management experience, past performance
    and price. While we have considerable experience, there are many
    other companies that have comparable skills. Many of our
    competitors are larger and have greater financial resources than
    we do.

 

    The rental tool business is highly fragmented with hundreds of
    companies offering various rental tool services. Our largest
    competitors include Weatherford, Quail Rental Tools, Knight
    Rental Tools and W-H Energy Services (Thomas Tools).

 

    Our five largest competitors in the contract drilling and
    workover service business, which operate primarily in Argentina,
    are Pride International, Servicios WellTech, Ensign Energy
    Services (formerly ODE), Nabors and Helmerich & Payne.

 

    We believe that there are five major directional drilling
    companies, Schlumberger, Halliburton, Baker Hughes, W-H Energy
    Services (Pathfinder) and Weatherford, that market both
    worldwide and in the United States as well as numerous small
    regional players.

 

    Significant competitors in the casing and tubing markets we
    serve include Frank’s Casing Crew and Rental Tools,
    Weatherford, BJ Services, Tesco and Premier. These markets
    remain highly competitive and fragmented with numerous casing
    and tubing crew companies working in the United States. Our
    primary competitors in Mexico are South American Enterprises and
    Weatherford, both of which provide similar products and services.

 

    Our largest competitor for compressed air drilling services is
    Weatherford. Weatherford focuses on large projects, but also
    competes in the more common compressed air, mist, foam and
    aerated mud drilling applications. Other competition comes from
    smaller regional companies.

 

    We believe we own approximately 30% of the capillary tubing
    units in the southwestern United States that are used for
    capillary chemical injection services. There are two other
    significant competitors in the capillary chemical injection
    services portion of the production services market, Weatherford
    and BJ Services. Additionally, in the coiled tubing services
    market there are numerous competitors, most of which have larger
    coiled tubing services operations than us.

 

Backlog

 

    We do not view backlog of orders as a significant measure for
    our business because our jobs are short-term in nature,
    typically one to 30 days, without significant on-going
    commitments.

 

Employees

 

    Our strategy includes acquiring companies with strong management
    and entering into long-term employment contracts with key
    employees in order to preserve customer relationships and assure
    continuity following acquisition. In general, we believe we have
    good relations with our employees. None of our employees, other
    than our DLS employees, are represented by a union. We actively
    train employees across various functions, which we believe is
    crucial to motivate our workforce and maximize efficiency.
    Employees showing a higher level of skill are trained on more
    technologically complex equipment and given greater
    responsibility. All employees are responsible for on-going
    quality assurance. At March 1, 2007, we had approximately
    2,567 employees. Almost all of DLS’ operations are subject
    to collective bargaining agreements. We believe that we maintain
    a satisfactory relationship with the unions to which DLS’
    employees belong.

 

Insurance

 

    We carry a variety of insurance coverages for our operations,
    and we are partially self-insured for certain claims in amounts
    that we believe to be customary and reasonable. However, there
    is a risk that our insurance may not be sufficient to cover any
    particular loss or that insurance may not cover all losses.
    Insurance rates have in the past been subject to wide
    fluctuation and changes in coverage could result in less
    coverage, increases in cost or higher deductibles and retentions.



    12



Table of Contents

 

Seasonality

 

    Oil and natural gas operations of our customers located offshore
    and onshore in the Gulf of Mexico and in Mexico may be adversely
    affected by hurricanes and tropical storms, resulting in reduced
    demand for our services. For example, in the summer of 2005, the
    Gulf of Mexico suffered an unusually high number of hurricanes
    with unusual intensity. In addition, our customers’
    operations in the Mid-Continent and Rocky Mountain regions of
    the United States are also adversely affected by seasonal
    weather conditions. These weather conditions limit our access to
    these job sites and our ability to service wells in these areas.
    These constraints decrease drilling activity and the resulting
    shortages or high costs could delay our operations and
    materially increase our operating and capital costs.

 

Federal
    Regulations and Environmental Matters

 

    Our operations are subject to federal, state and local laws and
    regulations relating to the energy industry in general and the
    environment in particular. Environmental laws have in recent
    years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose
    greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible
    parties. Because we provide services to companies producing oil
    and natural gas, which are toxic substances, we may become
    subject to claims relating to the release of such substances
    into the environment. While we are not currently aware of any
    situation involving an environmental claim that would likely
    have a material adverse effect on us, it is possible that an
    environmental claim could arise that could cause our business to
    suffer. We do not anticipate any material expenditures to comply
    with environmental regulations affecting our operations.

 

    In addition to claims based on our current operations, we are
    from time to time named in environmental claims relating to our
    activities prior to our reorganization in 1988 (See
    “Item 3. Legal Proceedings”).

 

Intellectual
    Property Rights

 

    Except for our relationships with our customers and suppliers
    described above, we do not own any patents, trademarks,
    licenses, franchises or concessions which we believe are
    material to the success of our business. As part of our overall
    corporate strategy to focus on our core business of providing
    services to the oil and natural gas industry and to increase
    stockholder value, we are investigating the sale or license of
    our worldwide rights to trade names and logos for products and
    services outside the energy sector.


 







ITEM 1A.  


RISK
    FACTORS




 

    Our business, financial condition, results of operations and the
    trading price of our securities can be materially and adversely
    affected by many events and conditions, including the following:

 

Risks
    Associated With Our Company

 

We may
    fail to acquire additional businesses, which will restrict our
    growth and may have a material adverse effect on our stock price
    or on our ability to meet our obligations under (and the price
    of) our securities.

 

    Our business strategy is to acquire companies operating in the
    oilfield services industry. However, there can be no assurance
    that we will be successful in acquiring any additional
    companies. Successful acquisition of new companies will depend
    on various factors, including but not limited to:

 







 
    • 


    our ability to obtain financing;


 

 
    • 


    the competitive environment for acquisitions; and


 

 
    • 


    the integration and synergy issues described in the next risk
    factor.



 

    There can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire and
    successfully operate any particular business or that we will be
    able to expand into areas that we have targeted. If we fail to
    acquire additional businesses, our financial condition, our
    results of operations, the price of our common stock and our
    ability to meet our obligations under long-term notes may be
    materially adversely affected.

 

Difficulties
    in integrating acquired businesses may result in reduced
    revenues and income.

 

    We may not be able to successfully integrate the businesses of
    our operating subsidiaries or any business we may acquire in the
    future. The integration of the businesses will be complex and
    time consuming, will



    13



Table of Contents


    place a significant strain on management and our information
    systems, and this strain could disrupt our businesses.
    Furthermore, if our combined businesses continue to grow
    rapidly, we may be required to replace our current information
    and accounting systems with systems designed for companies that
    are larger than ours. We may be adversely impacted by unknown
    liabilities of acquired businesses. We may encounter substantial
    difficulties, costs and delays involved in integrating common
    accounting, information and communication systems, operating
    procedures, internal controls and human resources practices,
    including incompatibility of business cultures and the loss of
    key employees and customers. These difficulties may reduce our
    ability to gain customers or retain existing customers, and may
    increase operating expenses, resulting in reduced revenues and
    income and a failure to realize the anticipated benefits of
    acquisitions.

 

    In particular, the Specialty, DLS and OGR acquisitions are our
    largest acquisitions to date and, consequently, the inherent
    integration risks may have a greater effect on us than the risks
    posed by our previous acquisitions. We will be conducting parts
    of the integration of these companies simultaneously, and as a
    result we could strain our current resources. Furthermore, we
    will depend on these entities’ continued performance as a
    source of cash flow to service our debt obligations.

 

    We have made numerous acquisitions during the past five years.
    As a result of these transactions, our past performance is not
    indicative of future performance, and investors should not base
    their expectations as to our future performance on our
    historical results.

 

Our
    acquisition of DLS has substantially changed the nature of our
    operations and business.

 

    Our acquisition of DLS has substantially changed the nature and
    geographic location of our operations and business as a result
    of the character and location of DLS’ businesses, which
    have substantially different operating characteristics and are
    in different geographic locations from our other businesses.
    Prior to our acquisition of DLS, we had operated as an oilfield
    services company domestically in Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico,
    Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah, Wyoming, offshore in the
    Gulf of Mexico, and internationally in Mexico. DLS’
    business is located primarily in Argentina, and we have no
    significant operations in South America other than through DLS.
    Accordingly, this acquisition has subjected and will continue to
    subject us to risks inherent in operating in a foreign country
    where we do not have significant prior experience. DLS’
    business consists of employing drilling and workover rigs for
    drilling, completion and repair services for oil and gas wells.
    We do not own any drilling rigs or workover rigs other than
    through DLS, and have not historically provided such services
    prior to our acquisition of DLS. Consequently, we may not be
    able to realize the economic benefits of this acquisition as
    efficiently as in our prior acquisitions, if at all.

 

Failure
    to maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or
    internal controls over financial reporting could have a material
    adverse effect on our operations.

 

    As part of our growth strategy, we have recently completed
    several acquisitions of privately-held businesses, including
    closely-held entities, and in the future, we may make additional
    strategic acquisitions of privately-held businesses. Prior to
    becoming part of our consolidated company, these acquired
    businesses have not been required to implement or maintain the
    disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls over
    financial reporting that federal law requires of publicly-held
    companies such as ours. Similarly, it is likely that our future
    acquired businesses will not have been required to maintain such
    disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls prior to
    their acquisition. Likewise, upon the completion of any future
    acquisition, we will be required to integrate the acquired
    business into our consolidated company’s system of
    disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over
    financial reporting, but we cannot assure you as to how long the
    integration process may take for any business that we may
    acquire. Furthermore, during the integration process, we may not
    be able to fully implement our consolidated disclosure controls
    and internal controls over financial reporting. With respect to
    our acquisition of DLS and our recent acquisition of
    substantially all of the assets of OGR, this risk is exacerbated
    by each of DLS’ and OGR’s relative size, when compared
    to the rest of our consolidated company.

 

    Likewise, during the course of our integration of any acquired
    business (including DLS and OGR), we may identify needed
    improvements to our or such acquired business’ internal
    controls and may be required to design enhanced processes and
    controls in order to make such improvements. This could result
    in significant



    14



Table of Contents


    delays and costs to us and could require us to divert
    substantial resources, including management time, from other
    activities.

 

    If we fail to achieve and maintain the adequacy of our
    disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls, as such standards are modified, supplemented
    or amended from time to time, we may not be able to conclude
    that we have effective disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or
    effective internal controls over financial reporting in
    accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. If:

 







 
    • 


    we are not successful in improving our financial reporting
    process, our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls over financial reporting;


 

 
    • 


    we identify deficiencies
    and/or one
    or more material weaknesses in our internal controls over
    financial reporting; or


 

 
    • 


    we are not successful in integrating acquired businesses (such
    as DLS and OGR) into our consolidated company’s system of
    disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over
    financial reporting,



 

    then our independent registered public accounting firm may be
    unable to attest that our management’s assessment of our
    internal controls over financial reporting is fairly stated, or
    they may be unable to express an opinion on our
    management’s evaluation of, or on the effectiveness of, our
    internal controls.

 

    If it is determined that our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls over financial reporting are not effective
    and/or we
    fail to satisfy the requirements of Section 404 of the
    Sarbanes-Oxley Act on a timely basis, we may not be able to
    provide reliable financial and other reports or prevent fraud,
    which, in turn, could harm our business and operating results,
    cause investors to lose confidence in the accuracy and
    completeness of our financial reports, have a material adverse
    effect on the trading price of our common stock
    and/or
    adversely affect our ability to timely file our periodic reports
    with the SEC. Any failure to timely file our periodic reports
    with the SEC may give rise to a default under the indentures
    governing our outstanding 9.0% senior notes due 2014, and
    our outstanding 8.5% senior notes due 2017 (which we refer
    to collectively as our outstanding senior notes) and any other
    debt securities we may offer and, ultimately, an acceleration of
    amounts due thereunder. In addition, a default under the
    indentures generally will also give rise to a default under our
    credit agreement and could cause the acceleration of amounts due
    under the credit agreement. If an acceleration of our
    outstanding senior notes or our other debt were to occur, we
    cannot assure you that we would have sufficient funds to repay
    such obligations.

 

Historically,
    we have been dependent on a few customers operating in a single
    industry; the loss of one or more customers could adversely
    affect our financial condition and results of
    operations.

 

    Our customers are engaged in the oil and natural gas drilling
    business in the United States, Mexico and elsewhere.
    Historically, we have been dependent upon a few customers for a
    significant portion of our revenues. In 2006, one of our
    customers, Pan American Energy represented 11.7% of our
    consolidated revenues. In 2005, no single customer generated
    over 10% of our revenues. In 2004, Matyep represented 10.8% of
    our revenues, and Burlington Resources represented 10.1% of our
    revenues. Additionally, DLS currently relies on one customer for
    a majority of its revenue. In 2006, Pan American Energy
    represented 51.9% of DLS’ revenues. In 2005, Pan American
    Energy represented 55% of DLS’ revenues. This concentration
    of customers may increase our overall exposure to credit risk,
    and customers will likely be similarly affected by changes in
    economic and industry conditions. Our financial condition and
    results of operations will be materially adversely affected if
    one or more of our significant customers fails to pay us or
    ceases to contract with us for our services on terms that are
    favorable to us or at all.

 

Our
    international operations may expose us to political and other
    uncertainties, including risks of:

 







 
    • 


    terrorist acts, war and civil disturbances;


 

 
    • 


    changes in laws or policies regarding the award of contracts; and


 

 
    • 


    the inability to collect or repatriate currency, income, capital
    or assets.



 

    Part of our strategy is to prudently and opportunistically
    acquire businesses and assets that complement our existing
    products and services, and to expand our geographic footprint.
    If we make acquisitions in other countries, we may increase our
    exposure to the risks discussed above.



    15



Table of Contents

 

Environmental
    liabilities could result in substantial losses.

 

    Since our reorganization under the U.S. federal bankruptcy
    laws in 1988, a number of parties, including the Environmental
    Protection Agency, have asserted that we are responsible for the
    cleanup of hazardous waste sites with respect to our
    pre-bankruptcy activities. We believe that such claims are
    barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and we have not experienced
    any material expense in relation to any such claims. However, if
    we do not prevail with respect to these claims in the future, or
    if additional environmental claims are asserted against us
    relating to our current or future activities in the oil and
    natural gas industry, we could become subject to material
    environmental liabilities that could have a material adverse
    effect on our financial condition and results of operations.

 

Products
    liability claims relating to discontinued operations could
    result in substantial losses.

 

    Since our reorganization under the U.S. federal bankruptcy
    laws in 1988, we have been regularly named in products liability
    lawsuits primarily resulting from the manufacture of products
    containing asbestos. In connection with our bankruptcy, a
    special products liability trust was established to address
    products liability claims. We believe that claims against us are
    barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and that the products
    liability trust will continue to be responsible for products
    liability claims. Since 1988, no court has ruled that we are
    responsible for products liability claims. However, if we are
    held responsible for product liability claims, we could suffer
    substantial losses that could have a material adverse effect on
    our financial condition and results of operations. We have not
    manufactured products containing asbestos since our
    reorganization in 1988.

 

We may
    be subject to claims for personal injury and property damage,
    which could materially adversely affect our financial condition
    and results of operations.

 

    Our products and services are used for the exploration and
    production of oil and natural gas. These operations are subject
    to inherent hazards that can cause personal injury or loss of
    life, damage to or destruction of property, equipment, the
    environment and marine life, and suspension of operations.
    Litigation arising from an accident at a location where our
    products or services are used or provided may cause us to be
    named as a defendant in lawsuits asserting potentially large
    claims. We maintain customary insurance to protect our business
    against these potential losses. Our insurance has deductibles or
    self-insured retentions and contains certain coverage
    exclusions. However, we could become subject to material
    uninsured liabilities that could have a material adverse effect
    on our financial condition and results of operations.

 

The
    loss of key executives would adversely affect our ability to
    effectively finance and manage our business, acquire new
    businesses, and obtain and retain customers.

 

    We are dependent upon the efforts and skills of our executives
    to finance and manage our business, identify and consummate
    additional acquisitions and obtain and retain customers. These
    executives include:

 







 
    • 


    Chief Executive Officer and Chairman Munawar H.
    Hidayatallah; and


 

 
    • 


    Vice Chairman, President and Chief Operating Officer Burt A.
    Adams.



 

    In December 2006, David Wilde resigned as our President and
    Chief Operating Officer. In light of Mr. Wilde’s
    significant contributions to our recent growth, his resignation
    could have a material adverse effect on our future performance.
    In addition, our development and expansion will require
    additional experienced management and operations personnel. No
    assurance can be given that we will be able to identify and
    retain these employees. The loss of the services of one or more
    of our key executives could increase our exposure to the other
    risks described in this “Risk Factors” section. We do
    not maintain key man insurance on any of our personnel.



    16



Table of Contents

 

Risks
    Associated With Our Industry

 

Cyclical
    declines in oil and natural gas prices may result in reduced use
    of our services, affecting our business, financial condition and
    results of operations and our ability to meet our capital
    expenditure obligations and financial commitments.

 

    The oil and natural gas exploration and drilling business is
    highly cyclical. Generally, as oil and natural gas prices
    decrease, exploration and drilling activity declines as
    marginally profitable projects become uneconomic and are either
    delayed or eliminated. Declines in the number of operating
    drilling rigs result in reduced use of and prices for our
    services. Accordingly, when oil and natural gas prices are
    relatively low, our revenues and income will suffer. Oil and
    natural gas prices depend on many factors beyond our control,
    including the following:

 







 
    • 


    economic conditions in the United States and elsewhere;


 

 
    • 


    changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production of the Organization of Petroleum
    Exporting Countries, commonly called OPEC;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production of non-OPEC countries;


 

 
    • 


    the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other
    oil and natural gas producing activities;


 

 
    • 


    the level of global oil and natural gas inventories; and


 

 
    • 


    advances in exploration, development and production technologies.



 

    Depending on the market prices of oil and natural gas, companies
    exploring for oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their
    drilling programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling
    services. Our contracts are generally short-term, and oil and
    natural gas companies tend to respond quickly to upward or
    downward changes in prices. Any reduction in the demand for
    drilling services may materially erode both pricing and
    utilization rates for our services and adversely affect our
    financial results. As a result, we may suffer losses, be unable
    to make necessary capital expenditures and be unable to meet our
    financial obligations.

 

Our
    industry is highly competitive, with intense price
    competition.

 

    The markets in which we operate are highly competitive.
    Contracts are traditionally awarded on a competitive bid basis.
    Pricing is often the primary factor in determining which
    qualified contractor is awarded a job. The competitive
    environment has intensified as recent mergers among oil and
    natural gas companies have reduced the number of available
    customers. Many other oilfield services companies are larger
    than we are and have resources that are significantly greater
    than our resources. These competitors are better able to
    withstand industry downturns, compete on the basis of price and
    acquire new equipment and technologies, all of which could
    affect our revenues and profitability. These competitors compete
    with us both for customers and for acquisitions of other
    businesses. This competition may cause our business to suffer.
    We believe that competition for contracts will continue to be
    intense in the foreseeable future.

 

We may
    experience increased labor costs or the unavailability of
    skilled workers and the failure to retain key personnel could
    hurt our operations.

 

    Companies in our industry, including us, are dependent upon the
    available labor pool of skilled employees. We compete with other
    oilfield services businesses and other employers to attract and
    retain qualified personnel with the technical skills and
    experience required to provide our customers with the highest
    quality service. We are also subject to the Fair Labor Standards
    Act, which governs such matters as minimum wage, overtime and
    other working conditions. A shortage in the labor pool of
    skilled workers or other general inflationary pressures or
    changes in applicable laws and regulations could make it more
    difficult for us to attract and retain personnel and could
    require us to enhance our wage and benefits packages. There can
    be no assurance that labor costs will not increase. Any increase
    in our operating costs could cause our business to suffer.



    17



Table of Contents

 

Severe
    weather could have a material adverse impact on our
    business.

 

    Our business could be materially and adversely affected by
    severe weather. Repercussions of severe weather conditions may
    include:

 







 
    • 


    curtailment of services;


 

 
    • 


    weather-related damage to facilities and equipment resulting in
    suspension of operations;


 

 
    • 


    inability to deliver materials to job sites in accordance with
    contract schedules; and


 

 
    • 


    loss of productivity.



 

    In addition, oil and natural gas operations of our customers
    located offshore and onshore in the Gulf of Mexico and in Mexico
    may be adversely affected by hurricanes and tropical storms,
    resulting in reduced demand for our services. Further, our
    customers’ operations in the Mid-Continent and Rocky
    Mountain regions of the United States are also adversely
    affected by seasonal weather conditions. This limits our access
    to these job sites and our ability to service wells in these
    areas. These constraints decrease drilling activity and the
    resulting shortages or high costs could delay our operations and
    materially increase our operating and capital costs.

 

Our
    business may be affected by terrorist activity and by security
    measures taken in response to terrorism.

 

    We may experience loss of business or delays or defaults in
    payments from payers that have been affected by actual or
    potential terrorist activities. Some oil and natural gas
    drilling companies have implemented security measures in
    response to potential terrorist activities, including access
    restrictions, that could adversely affect our ability to market
    our services to new and existing customers and could increase
    our costs. Terrorist activities and potential terrorist
    activities and any resulting economic downturn could adversely
    impact our results of operations, impair our ability to raise
    capital or otherwise adversely affect our ability to grow our
    business.

 

We are
    subject to government regulations.

 

    We are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws
    and regulations relating to the energy industry in general and
    the environment in particular. Environmental laws have in recent
    years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose
    greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible
    parties. Although we are not aware of any proposed material
    changes in any federal, state, local or foreign statutes, rules
    or regulations, any changes could materially affect our
    financial condition and results of operations.

 

Risks
    Associated With DLS’ Business and Industry

 

A
    material or extended decline in expenditures by oil and gas
    companies due to a decline or volatility in oil and gas prices,
    a decrease in demand for oil and gas or other factors may reduce
    demand for DLS’ services and substantially reduce DLS’
    revenues, profitability, cash flows
    and/or
    liquidity.

 

    The profitability of DLS’ operations depends upon
    conditions in the oil and natural gas industry and,
    specifically, the level of exploration and production
    expenditures of oil and gas company customers. The oil and
    natural gas industry is cyclical and subject to governmental
    price controls. The demand for contract drilling and related
    services is directly influenced by many factors beyond DLS’
    control, including:

 







 
    • 


    oil and gas prices and expectations about future prices;


 

 
    • 


    the demand for oil and gas, both in Latin America and globally;


 

 
    • 


    the cost of producing and delivering oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    advances in exploration, development and production technology;


 

 
    • 


    government regulations, including governmental imposed commodity
    price controls, export controls and renationalization of a
    country’s oil and natural gas industry;





    18



Table of Contents

 







 
    • 


    local and international political and economic conditions;


 

 
    • 


    the ability of OPEC to set and maintain production levels and
    prices;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production by non-OPEC countries; and


 

 
    • 


    the policies of various governments regarding exploration and
    development of their oil and gas reserves.



 

    Depending on the factors outlined above, companies exploring for
    oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their drilling
    programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling services. Such a
    reduction in demand may erode daily rates and utilization of
    DLS’ rigs. Any significant decrease in daily rates or
    utilization of DLS’ rigs could materially reduce DLS’
    revenues, profitability, cash flows
    and/or
    liquidity.

 

A
    majority of DLS’ revenues are derived from one customer.
    The termination of the contract with this customer could have a
    significant negative effect on the revenues, results of
    operations and financial condition of DLS.

 

    A majority of DLS’ revenues are currently received pursuant
    to a strategic agreement with Pan American Energy. Pan American
    Energy is a joint venture that is owned 60% by British Petroleum
    and 40% by Bridas Corporation, an affiliate of the former DLS
    stockholders from which we acquired DLS, and which we refer to
    collectively as the DLS sellers. This agreement terminates on
    June 30, 2008. However, Pan American Energy may terminate
    the agreement (i) without cause at any time with
    60 days’ notice, or (ii) in the event of a breach
    of the agreement by DLS if such breach is not cured within
    20 days of notice of the breach. DLS is currently in
    negotiations to extend this agreement to December 2010.

 

    Because a majority of DLS’ revenues are currently generated
    under this agreement, DLS’ revenues and earnings will be
    materially adversely affected if this agreement is terminated
    unless DLS is able to enter into a satisfactory substitute
    arrangement. We cannot assure you that in the event of such a
    termination DLS would be able to enter into a substitute
    arrangement on terms similar to those contained in the current
    agreement with Pan American Energy.

 

DLS’
    operations and financial condition could be affected by union
    activity and general labor unrest. Additionally, DLS’ labor
    expenses could increase as a result of governmental regulation
    of payments to employees.

 

    In Argentina, labor organizations have substantial support and
    have considerable political influence. The demands of labor
    organizations have increased in recent years as a result of the
    general labor unrest and dissatisfaction resulting from the
    disparity between the cost of living and salaries in Argentina
    as a result of the devaluation of the Argentine peso. There can
    be no assurance that DLS will not face labor disruptions in the
    future or that any such disruptions will not have a material
    adverse effect on DLS’ financial condition or results of
    operations.

 

    The Argentine government has in the past and may in the future
    promulgate laws, regulations and decrees requiring companies in
    the private sector to maintain minimum wage levels and provide
    specified benefits to employees, including significant mandatory
    severance payments. In the aftermath of the Argentine economic
    crisis of 2001 and 2002, both the government and private sector
    companies have experienced significant pressure from employees
    and labor organizations relating to wage levels and employee
    benefits. In early 2005, the Argentine government promised not
    to order salary increases by decree. However, there has been no
    abatement of pressure to mandate salary increases, and it is
    possible the government will adopt measures that will increase
    salaries or require DLS to provide additional benefits, which
    would increase DLS’ costs and potentially reduce DLS’
    profitability, cash flow
    and/or
    liquidity.

 

Rig
    upgrade, refurbishment and construction projects are subject to
    risks, including delays and cost overruns, which could have an
    adverse effect on DLS’ results of operations and cash
    flows.

 

    DLS often has to make upgrade and refurbishment expenditures for
    its rig fleet to comply with DLS’ quality management and
    preventive maintenance system or contractual requirements or
    when repairs are required in response to an inspection by a
    governmental authority. DLS may also make significant
    expenditures when it moves rigs from one location to another.
    Additionally, DLS may make substantial



    19



Table of Contents


    expenditures for the construction of new rigs. Rig upgrade,
    refurbishment and construction projects are subject to the risks
    of delay or cost overruns inherent in any large construction
    project, including the following:

 







 
    • 


    shortages of material or skilled labor;


 

 
    • 


    unforeseen engineering problems;


 

 
    • 


    unanticipated change orders;


 

 
    • 


    work stoppages;


 

 
    • 


    adverse weather conditions;


 

 
    • 


    long lead times for manufactured rig components;


 

 
    • 


    unanticipated cost increases; and


 

 
    • 


    inability to obtain the required permits or approvals.



 

    Significant cost overruns or delays could adversely affect
    DLS’ financial condition and results of operations.
    Additionally, capital expenditures for rig upgrade,
    refurbishment or construction projects could exceed DLS’
    planned capital expenditures, impairing DLS’ ability to
    service its debt obligations.

 

An
    oversupply of comparable rigs in the geographic markets in which
    DLS competes could depress the utilization rates and dayrates
    for DLS’ rigs and materially reduce DLS’ revenues and
    profitability.

 

    Utilization rates, which are the number of days a rig actually
    works divided by the number of days the rig is available for
    work, and dayrates, which are the contract prices customers pay
    for rigs per day, are also affected by the total supply of
    comparable rigs available for service in the geographic markets
    in which DLS competes. Improvements in demand in a geographic
    market may cause DLS’ competitors to respond by moving
    competing rigs into the market, thus intensifying price
    competition. Significant new rig construction could also
    intensify price competition. In the past, there have been
    prolonged periods of rig oversupply with correspondingly
    depressed utilization rates and dayrates largely due to earlier,
    speculative construction of new rigs. Improvements in dayrates
    and expectations of longer-term, sustained improvements in
    utilization rates and dayrates for drilling rigs may lead to
    construction of new rigs. These increases in the supply of rigs
    could depress the utilization rates and dayrates for DLS’
    rigs and materially reduce DLS’ revenues and profitability.

 

Worldwide
    political and economic developments may hurt DLS’
    operations materially.

 

    Currently, DLS derives substantially all of its revenues from
    operations in Argentina and a small portion from operations in
    Bolivia. DLS’ operations are subject to the following
    risks, among others:

 







 
    • 


    expropriation of assets;


 

 
    • 


    nationalization of components of the energy industry in the
    geographic areas where DLS operates;


 

 
    • 


    foreign currency fluctuations and devaluation;


 

 
    • 


    new economic and tax policies;


 

 
    • 


    restrictions on currency, income, capital or asset repatriation;


 

 
    • 


    political instability, war and civil disturbances;


 

 
    • 


    uncertainty or instability resulting from armed hostilities or
    other crises in the Middle East or the geographic areas in which
    DLS operates; and


 

 
    • 


    acts of terrorism.



 

    DLS attempts to limit the risks of currency fluctuation and
    restrictions on currency repatriation where possible by
    obtaining contracts providing for payment of a percentage of the
    contract in U.S. dollars or freely convertible foreign
    currency. To the extent possible, DLS seeks to limit its
    exposure to local currencies by matching the acceptance of local
    currencies to DLS’ expense requirements in those
    currencies. Although DLS has done this in the past, DLS may not
    be able to take these actions in the future, thereby exposing
    DLS to foreign currency fluctuations that could cause its
    results of operations, financial condition and cash flows to
    deteriorate materially.



    20



Table of Contents

 

    Over the past several years, Argentina and Bolivia have
    experienced political and economic instability that resulted in
    significant changes in their general economic policies and
    regulations.

 

    DLS derives a small portion of its revenues from operating one
    drilling rig in Bolivia. Recently, Bolivian President Evo
    Morales announced the nationalization of Bolivia’s natural
    gas industry and ordered the Bolivian military to occupy
    Bolivia’s natural gas fields. This measure will likely
    adversely affect the Bolivian operations of foreign oil and
    natural gas companies operating in Bolivia, including DLS’
    customers and potential future customers, and accordingly,
    DLS’ prospects for future business in Bolivia may be
    harmed. In addition, in light of these recent political
    developments in Bolivia, DLS’ assets in Bolivia may be
    subject to an increased risk of expropriation or government
    imposed restrictions on movement to a new location.

 

    In light of the early stage and uncertainty of political
    developments affecting the energy industry in Bolivia, we are
    unable to predict the effect that recent events may have on
    DLS’ operations, financial results or business plans. There
    is a risk that the changes resulting from the recent events in
    Bolivia will adversely affect DLS’ financial position or
    results of operations, and DLS’ operations may be further
    adversely affected by continuing economic and political
    instability in Bolivia. Furthermore, if nationalistic measures
    similar to those developing in Bolivia were to be adopted in
    other countries where DLS may in the future seek drilling
    contracts, DLS’ prospects in such countries may be
    adversely affected.

 

    DLS’ operations are also subject to other risks, including
    foreign monetary and tax policies, expropriation,
    nationalization and nullification or modification of contracts.
    Additionally, DLS’ ability to compete may be limited by
    foreign governmental regulations that favor or require the
    awarding of contracts to local contractors or by regulations
    requiring foreign contractors to employ citizens of, or purchase
    supplies from, a particular jurisdiction. Furthermore, DLS may
    face governmentally imposed restrictions from time to time on
    its ability to transfer funds.

 

Devaluation
    of the Argentine peso will adversely affect DLS’ results of
    operations.

 

    The Argentine peso has been subject to significant devaluation
    in the past and may be subject to significant fluctuations in
    the future. Given the economic and political uncertainties in
    Argentina, it is impossible to predict whether, and to what
    extent, the value of the Argentine peso may depreciate or
    appreciate against the U.S. dollar. We cannot predict how
    these uncertainties will affect DLS’ financial results, but
    there is a risk that DLS’ financial performance could be
    adversely affected. Moreover, we cannot predict whether the
    Argentine government will further modify its monetary policy
    and, if so, what effect any of these changes could have on the
    value of the Argentine peso. Such changes could have an adverse
    effect on DLS’ financial condition and results of
    operations.

 

Argentina
    continues to face considerable political and economic
    uncertainty.

 

    Although general economic conditions have shown improvement and
    political protests and social disturbances have diminished
    considerably since the economic crisis of 2001 and 2002, the
    rapid and radical nature of the changes in the Argentine social,
    political, economic and legal environment over the past several
    years and the absence of a clear political consensus in favor of
    any particular set of economic policies have given rise to
    significant uncertainties about the country’s economic and
    political future. It is currently unclear whether the economic
    and political instability experienced over the past several
    years will continue and it is possible that, despite recent
    economic growth, Argentina may return to a deeper recession,
    higher inflation and unemployment and greater social unrest. If
    instability persists, there could be a material adverse effect
    on DLS’ results of operations and financial condition.

 

    In the event of further social or political crisis, companies in
    Argentina may also face the risk of further civil and social
    unrest, strikes, expropriation, nationalization, forced
    renegotiation or modification of existing contracts and changes
    in taxation policies, including royalty and tax increases and
    retroactive tax claims.

 

    In addition, investments in Argentine companies may be further
    affected by changes in laws and policies of the United States
    affecting foreign trade, taxation and investment.



    21



Table of Contents

 

An
    increase in inflation could have a material adverse effect on
    DLS’ results of operations.

 

    The devaluation of the Argentine peso created pressures on the
    domestic price system that generated high rates of inflation in
    2002 before substantially stabilizing in 2003 and remaining
    stable in 2004. In 2005, however, inflation rates began to
    increase. In addition, in response to the economic crisis in
    2002, the federal government granted the Central Bank greater
    control over monetary policy than was available to it under the
    previous monetary regime, known as the
    “Convertibility” regime, including the ability to
    print currency, to make advances to the federal government to
    cover its anticipated budget deficit and to provide financial
    assistance to financial institutions with liquidity problems. We
    cannot assure you that inflation rates will remain stable in the
    future. Significant inflation could have a material adverse
    effect on DLS’ results of operations and financial
    condition.

 

DLS’
    customers may seek to cancel or renegotiate some of DLS’
    drilling contracts during periods of depressed market conditions
    or if DLS experiences operational difficulties.

 

    Substantially all of DLS’ contracts with major customers
    are dayrate contracts, where DLS charges a fixed charge per day
    regardless of the number of days needed to drill the well.
    During depressed market conditions, a customer may no longer
    need a rig that is currently under contract or may be able to
    obtain a comparable rig at a lower daily rate. As a result,
    customers may seek to renegotiate the terms of their existing
    drilling contracts or avoid their obligations under those
    contracts. In addition, DLS’ customers may have the right
    to terminate existing contracts if DLS experiences operational
    problems. The likelihood that a customer may seek to terminate a
    contract for operational difficulties is increased during
    periods of market weakness. The cancellation of a number of
    DLS’ drilling contracts could materially reduce DLS’
    revenues and profitability.

 

DLS is
    subject to numerous governmental laws and regulations, including
    those that may impose significant liability on DLS for
    environmental and natural resource damages.

 

    Many aspects of DLS’ operations are subject to laws and
    regulations that may relate directly or indirectly to the
    contract drilling and well servicing industries, including those
    requiring DLS to control the discharge of oil and other
    contaminants into the environment or otherwise relating to
    environmental protection. The countries where DLS operates have
    environmental laws and regulations covering the discharge of oil
    and other contaminants and protection of the environment in
    connection with operations. Failure to comply with these laws
    and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative,
    civil and even criminal penalties, the imposition of remedial
    obligations, and the issuance of injunctions that may limit or
    prohibit DLS’ operations. Laws and regulations protecting
    the environment have become more stringent in recent years and
    may in certain circumstances impose strict liability, rendering
    DLS liable for environmental and natural resource damages
    without regard to negligence or fault on DLS’ part. These
    laws and regulations may expose DLS to liability for the conduct
    of, or conditions caused by, others or for acts that were in
    compliance with all applicable laws at the time the acts were
    performed. The application of these requirements, the
    modification of existing laws or regulations or the adoption of
    new laws or regulations curtailing exploratory or development
    drilling for oil and gas could materially limit future contract
    drilling opportunities or materially increase DLS’ costs or
    both.

 

DLS is
    subject to hazards customary for drilling operations, which
    could adversely affect its financial
    performance if DLS is not adequately indemnified or
    insured.

 

    Substantially all of DLS’ operations are subject to hazards
    that are customary for oil and gas drilling operations,
    including blowouts, reservoir damage, loss of well control,
    cratering, oil and gas well fires and explosions, natural
    disasters, pollution and mechanical failure. Any of these risks
    could result in damage to or destruction of drilling equipment,
    personal injury and property damage, suspension of operations or
    environmental damage. Generally, drilling contracts provide for
    the division of responsibilities between a drilling company and
    its customer, and DLS generally obtains indemnification from its
    customers by contract for some of these risks. However, there
    may be limitations on the enforceability of indemnification
    provisions that allow a contractor to be indemnified for damages
    resulting from the contractor’s fault. To the extent that
    DLS is unable to transfer such risks to customers by contract or
    indemnification agreements, DLS generally seeks protection
    through insurance. However, DLS has a significant amount of
    self-insured retention or deductible



    22



Table of Contents


    for certain losses relating to workers’ compensation,
    employers’ liability, general liability and property
    damage. There is no assurance that such insurance or
    indemnification agreements will adequately protect DLS against
    liability from all of the consequences of the hazards and risks
    described above. The occurrence of an event not fully insured or
    for which DLS is not indemnified against, or the failure of a
    customer or insurer to meet its indemnification or insurance
    obligations, could result in substantial losses. In addition,
    there can be no assurance that insurance will continue to be
    available to cover any or all of these risks, or, even if
    available, that insurance premiums or other costs will not rise
    significantly in the future, so as to make the cost of such
    insurance prohibitive.

 

Risks
    Associated With an Investment in Our Common Stock

 

In
    connection with our recent acquisitions of DLS and substantially
    all the assets of OGR, the DLS
    sellers have the right to designate two nominees for election to
    our board of directors and OGR has the right to designate one
    nominee for election to our board of directors. The interests of
    the DLS sellers and OGR may be different from
    yours.

 

    The DLS sellers collectively hold 2.5 million shares of our
    common stock, representing approximately 7.3% of our issued and
    outstanding shares as of March 1, 2007. Under the investors
    rights agreement that we entered into in connection with the DLS
    acquisition, the DLS sellers have the right to designate two
    nominees for election to our board of directors. OGR holds
    3.2 million shares of our common stock, representing
    approximately 9.3% of our issued and outstanding shares as of
    March 1, 2007. Under the investor rights agreement that we
    entered into in connection with the OGR acquisition, OGR has the
    right to designate one nominee for election to our board of
    directors. As a result, the DLS sellers and OGR have a greater
    ability to determine the composition of our board of directors
    and to control our future operations and strategy as compared to
    the voting power and control that could be exercised by a
    stockholder owning the same number of shares and not benefiting
    from board designation rights.

 

    Conflicts of interest between the DLS sellers and OGR, on the
    one hand, and other holders of our securities, on the other
    hand, may arise with respect to sales of shares of capital stock
    owned by the DLS sellers or OGR or other matters. In addition,
    the interests of the DLS sellers or OGR regarding any proposed
    merger or sale may differ from the interests of other holders of
    our securities.

 

    The board designation rights described above could also have the
    effect of delaying or preventing a change in our control or
    otherwise discouraging a potential acquirer from attempting to
    obtain control of us, which in turn could have a material and
    adverse effect on the market price of our securities
    and/or our
    ability to meet our obligations thereunder.

 

We may
    have a contingent liability arising out of a possible violation
    of Section 5 of the Securities Act in connection with
    electronic communications sent to potential investors in our
    common stock.

 

    On or about July 20, 2006, one of the proposed underwriters
    of our common stock offering, which closed on August 14,
    2006, sent
    e-mails
and/or
    instant messages to approximately 20 potential investors in our
    common stock. Although we did not authorize these
    communications, and we believe they were not made or intended to
    be made on our behalf, these communications may have constituted
    violations of Section 5 of the Securities Act. Accordingly,
    if the recipients of these emails purchased shares in the August
    2006 common stock offering, they might have the right, under
    certain circumstances, to require us to repurchase those shares.
    Consequently, we could have a contingent liability arising out
    of these possible violations of the Securities Act. The
    magnitude of this liability is presently impossible to quantify,
    and would depend upon the number of shares purchased by the
    recipients of such communications and the trading price of our
    common stock. However, the proposed underwriter who sent these
    electronic communications did not act as an underwriter in the
    August 2006 common stock offering, and we and the underwriters
    that did participate in the August 2006 common stock offering
    took measures designed to ensure that the recipients of the
    communications did not have the opportunity to purchase shares
    in that offering. Furthermore, if any investors in our common
    stock do assert any such liability, we intend to contest the
    matter vigorously, and in light of the remedial measures and our
    belief that the communications were not made or intended to be
    made on our behalf, we do not believe that any such liability
    would be material to our financial condition.



    23



Table of Contents

 

Our
    stock price may decrease in response to various factors, which
    could adversely affect our business and cause our stockholders
    to suffer significant losses. These factors
    include:

 







 
    • 


    decreases in prices for oil and natural gas resulting in
    decreased demand for our services;


 

 
    • 


    variations in our operating results and failure to meet
    expectations of investors and analysts;


 

 
    • 


    increases in interest rates;


 

 
    • 


    the loss of customers;


 

 
    • 


    failure of customers to pay for our services;


 

 
    • 


    competition;


 

 
    • 


    illiquidity of the market for our common stock;


 

 
    • 


    developments specifically affecting the Argentine economy;


 

 
    • 


    sales of common stock by existing stockholders; and


 

 
    • 


    other developments affecting us or the financial markets.



 

    A reduced stock price will result in a loss to investors and
    will adversely affect our ability to issue stock to fund our
    activities.

 

Existing
    stockholders’ interest in us may be diluted by additional
    issuances of equity securities.

 

    We expect to issue additional equity securities to fund the
    acquisition of additional businesses and pursuant to employee
    benefit plans. We may also issue additional equity for other
    purposes. These securities may have the same rights as our
    common stock or, alternatively, may have dividend, liquidation,
    or other preferences to our common stock. The issuance of
    additional equity securities will dilute the holdings of
    existing stockholders and may reduce the share price of our
    common stock.

 

We do
    not expect to pay dividends on our common stock, and investors
    will be able to receive cash in respect of the shares of common
    stock only upon the sale of the shares.

 

    We have not paid any cash dividends on our common stock within
    the last ten years, and we have no intention in the foreseeable
    future to pay any cash dividends on our common stock.
    Furthermore, our credit agreement, the indenture governing our
    outstanding senior notes restrict our ability to pay dividends
    on our common stock. Therefore, an investor in our common stock
    will obtain an economic benefit from the common stock only after
    an increase in its trading price and only by selling the common
    stock.

 

Substantial
    sales of our common stock could adversely affect our stock
    price.

 

    Sales of a substantial number of shares of common stock, or the
    perception that such sales could occur, could adversely affect
    the market price of our common stock by introducing a large
    number of sellers to the market. Such sales could cause the
    market price of our common stock to decline.

 

    We have 34,251,443 shares outstanding as of March 1,
    2007. At December 31, 2006, we had reserved an additional
    3,099,365 shares of common stock for issuance under our
    equity compensation plans, of which 1,346,365 shares were
    issuable upon the exercise of outstanding options with a
    weighted average exercise price of $7.02 per share. In
    addition, we have reserved 4,000 shares of common stock for
    issuance upon the exercise of outstanding options (with an
    exercise price of $13.75 per share) granted to former and
    continuing board members in 1999 and 2000. At December 31,
    2006, we also have reserved 4,000 shares of common stock
    for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding warrants (with an
    exercise price of $4.65 per share).

 

    In connection with our acquisition of DLS, we entered into an
    investors rights agreement with the seller parties to the DLS
    stock purchase agreement, who collectively hold 2.5 million
    shares of our common stock. In connection with our acquisition
    of substantially all the assets of OGR, we entered into an
    investor rights agreement with OGR, who holds 3.2 million
    shares of our common stock. Under these agreements, the DLS
    sellers and OGR are entitled to certain rights with respect to
    the registration of the sale of such shares under the Securities
    Act. By exercising their registration rights and causing a large
    number of shares to be sold in the public market, these holders
    could cause the market price of our common stock to decline.



    24



Table of Contents

 

    We cannot predict whether future sales of our common stock, or
    the availability of our common stock for sale, will adversely
    affect the market price for our common stock or our ability to
    raise capital by offering equity securities.

 

Risks
    Associated With Our Indebtedness

 

We
    have a substantial amount of debt, which could adversely affect
    our financial health and prevent us from making principal and
    interest payments on our outstanding senior notes and our other
    debt.

 

    At December 31, 2006, after giving effect to the sale of
    the senior notes and the issuance of our common stock in January
    2007 and the application of the proceeds therefrom, as if such
    transaction had occurred on that date, we had approximately
    $518.4 million of consolidated total indebtedness
    outstanding and approximately $15.3 million of additional
    secured borrowing capacity available under our credit agreement.

 

    Our substantial debt could:

 







 
    • 


    make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with
    respect to our outstanding senior notes, any other debt
    securities we may offer and our other debt;


 

 
    • 


    increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and
    industry conditions, including declines in oil and natural gas
    prices and declines in drilling activities;


 

 
    • 


    limit our ability to obtain additional financing for future
    working capital, capital expenditures, mergers and other general
    corporate purposes;


 

 
    • 


    require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow
    from operations to payments on our debt, thereby reducing the
    availability of our cash flow for operations and other purposes;


 

 
    • 


    limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes
    in our business and the industry in which we operate;


 

 
    • 


    make us more vulnerable to increases in interest rates;


 

 
    • 


    place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our
    competitors that have less debt; and


 

 
    • 


    have a material adverse effect on us if we fail to comply with
    the covenants in the indentures relating to our outstanding
    senior notes, and any other debt securities we may offer or in
    the instruments governing our other debt.



 

    In addition, we may incur substantial additional debt in the
    future. Each of the indentures governing our outstanding senior
    notes permits (and we anticipate that the indentures governing
    any other debt securities we may offer will also permit) us to
    incur additional debt, and our credit agreement permits
    additional borrowings. If new debt is added to our current debt
    levels, these related risks could increase.

 

    We may not maintain sufficient revenues to sustain profitability
    or to meet our capital expenditure requirements and our
    financial obligations. Also, we may not be able to generate a
    sufficient amount of cash flow to meet our debt service
    obligations.

 

    Our ability to make scheduled payments or to refinance our
    obligations with respect to our debt will depend on our
    financial and operating performance, which, in turn, is subject
    to prevailing economic conditions and to certain financial,
    business, and other factors beyond our control. If our cash flow
    and capital resources are insufficient to fund our debt service
    obligations, we may be forced to reduce or delay scheduled
    expansion and capital expenditures, sell material assets or
    operations, obtain additional capital or restructure our debt.
    We cannot assure you that our operating performance, cash flow
    and capital resources will be sufficient for payment of our debt
    in the future. In the event that we are required to dispose of
    material assets or operations or restructure our debt to meet
    our debt service and other obligations, we cannot assure you
    that the terms of any such transaction would be satisfactory to
    us or if or how soon any such transaction could be completed.



    25



Table of Contents

 

If we
    fail to obtain additional financing, we may be unable to
    refinance our existing debt, expand our current operations or
    acquire new businesses, which could result in a failure to grow
    or result in defaults in our obligations under our credit
    agreement, our outstanding senior notes or our other debt
    securities.

 

    In order to refinance indebtedness, expand existing operations
    and acquire additional businesses, we will require substantial
    amounts of capital. There can be no assurance that financing,
    whether from equity or debt financings or other sources, will be
    available or, if available, will be on terms satisfactory to us.
    If we are unable to obtain such financing, we will be unable to
    acquire additional businesses and may be unable to meet our
    obligations under our credit agreement, our senior notes or any
    other debt securities we may offer.

 

The
    indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and our credit
    agreement impose (and we anticipate that the indentures
    governing any other debt securities we may offer will also
    impose) restrictions on us that may limit the discretion of
    management in operating our business and that, in turn, could
    impair our ability to meet our obligations.

 

    The indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and our
    credit agreement contain (and we anticipate that the indentures
    governing any other debt securities we may offer will also
    contain) various restrictive covenants that limit
    management’s discretion in operating our business. In
    particular, these covenants limit our ability to, among other
    things:

 







 
    • 


    incur additional debt;


 

 
    • 


    make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on
    our capital stock or purchase or redeem or retire capital stock;


 

 
    • 


    sell assets, including capital stock of our restricted
    subsidiaries;


 

 
    • 


    restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries;


 

 
    • 


    create liens;


 

 
    • 


    enter into transactions with affiliates; and


 

 
    • 


    merge or consolidate with another company.



 

    The credit agreement also requires us to maintain specified
    financial ratios and satisfy certain financial tests. Our
    ability to maintain or meet such financial ratios and tests may
    be affected by events beyond our control, including changes in
    general economic and business conditions, and we cannot assure
    you that we will maintain or meet such ratios and tests or that
    the lenders under the credit agreement will waive any failure to
    meet such ratios or tests.

 

    These covenants could materially and adversely affect our
    ability to finance our future operations or capital needs.
    Furthermore, they may restrict our ability to expand, to pursue
    our business strategies and otherwise to conduct our business.
    Our ability to comply with these covenants may be affected by
    circumstances and events beyond our control, such as prevailing
    economic conditions and changes in regulations, and we cannot
    assure you that we will be able to comply with them. A breach of
    these covenants could result in a default under the indentures
    governing our outstanding senior notes and any other debt
    securities we may offer
    and/or the
    credit agreement. If there were an event of default under any of
    the indentures
    and/or the
    credit agreement, the affected creditors could cause all amounts
    borrowed under these instruments to be due and payable
    immediately. Additionally, if we fail to repay indebtedness
    under our credit agreement when it becomes due, the lenders
    under the credit agreement could proceed against the assets
    which we have pledged to them as security. Our assets and cash
    flow might not be sufficient to repay our outstanding debt in
    the event of a default.


 







ITEM 1B.  


UNRESOLVED
    STAFF COMMENTS




 

    None.



    26



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 2.  


PROPERTIES




 

    The following table describes the location and general character
    of the principal physical properties used in each of our
    company’s businesses as of March 1, 2007. Our
    principal executive office is rented and located in Houston,
    Texas and the table below presents all of our operating
    locations and whether the property is owned or leased.

 



  
  
  
  
  




Business Segment



 



Location



 



Owned/Leased




 





Rental Tools
    



 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Leased — 2 locations
    




 


 


Victoria, Texas
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


Broussard, Louisiana
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Morgan City, Louisiana
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


New Orleans, Louisiana
    


 


Leased
    





International Drilling
    



 


Buenos Aires, Argentina
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Comodoro Rivadavia, Argentina
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


Neuquén, Argentina
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


Rincon de los Sauces, Argentina
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


Tartagal, Argentina
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


Santa Cruz, Bolivia
    


 


Leased
    





Directional Drilling Services
    



 


Corpus Christi, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Leased — 2 locations
    




 


 


Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Lafayette, Louisiana
    


 


Leased
    





Casing and Tubing Services
    



 


Corpus Christi, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Edinburg, Texas
    


 


Owned
    




 


 


Kilgore, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Pearsall, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Broussard, Louisiana
    


 


Leased — 2 locations
    




 


 


Houma, Louisiana
    


 


Leased
    





Compressed Air Drilling Services
    



 


Fort Stockton, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Grandbury, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Houston, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


San Angelo, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Sonora, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Carlsbad, New Mexico
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Farmington, New Mexico
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Denver, Colorado
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Grand Junction, Colorado
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Wilburton, Oklahoma
    


 


Leased
    





Production Services
    



 


Alvin, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Carthage, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Corpus Christi, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Kilgore, Texas
    


 


Leased — 2 locations
    




 


 


Midland, Texas
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Arcadia, Louisiana
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Broussard, Louisiana
    


 


1 Owned & 1 Leased
    




 


 


Cordell, Oklahoma
    


 


Leased
    




 


 


Houma, Louisiana
    


 


Leased
    






 







ITEM 3.  


LEGAL
    PROCEEDINGS




 

    On June 29, 1987, we filed for reorganization under
    Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. Our plan
    of reorganization was confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court after
    acceptance by our creditors and stockholders, and was
    consummated on December 2, 1988.

 

    At confirmation of our plan of reorganization, the United States
    Bankruptcy Court approved the establishment of the A-C
    Reorganization Trust as the primary vehicle for distributions
    and the administration



    27



Table of Contents


    of claims under our plan of reorganization, two trust funds to
    service health care and life insurance programs for retired
    employees and a trust fund to process and liquidate future
    product liability claims. The trusts assumed responsibility for
    substantially all remaining cash distributions to be made to
    holders of claims and interests pursuant to our plan of
    reorganization. We were thereby discharged of all debts that
    arose before confirmation of our plan of reorganization.

 

    We do not administer any of the aforementioned trusts and retain
    no responsibility for the assets transferred to or distributions
    to be made by such trusts pursuant to our plan of reorganization.

 

    As part of our plan of reorganization, we settled
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency claims for cleanup
    costs at all known sites where we were alleged to have disposed
    of hazardous waste. The EPA settlement included both past and
    future cleanup costs at these sites and released us of liability
    to other potentially responsible parties in connection with
    these specific sites. In addition, we negotiated settlements of
    various environmental claims asserted by certain state
    environmental protection agencies.

 

    Subsequent to our bankruptcy reorganization, the EPA and state
    environmental protection agencies have in a few cases asserted
    that we are liable for cleanup costs or fines in connection with
    several hazardous waste disposal sites containing products
    manufactured by us prior to consummation of our plan of
    reorganization. In each instance, we have taken the position
    that the cleanup costs and all other liabilities related to
    these sites were discharged in the bankruptcy, and the cases
    have been disposed of without material cost. A number of Federal
    Courts of Appeal have issued rulings consistent with this
    position, and based on such rulings, we believe that we will
    continue to prevail in our position that our liability to the
    EPA and third parties for claims for environmental cleanup costs
    that had pre-petition triggers have been discharged. A number of
    claimants have asserted claims for environmental cleanup costs
    that had pre-petition triggers, and in each event, the A-C
    Reorganization Trust, under its mandate to provide plan of
    reorganization implementation services to us, has responded to
    such claims, generally, by informing claimants that our
    liabilities were discharged in the bankruptcy. Each of such
    claims has been disposed of without material cost. However,
    there can be no assurance that we will not be subject to
    environmental claims relating to pre-bankruptcy activities that
    would have a material adverse effect on us.

 

    The EPA and certain state agencies continue from time to time to
    request information in connection with various waste disposal
    sites containing products manufactured by us before consummation
    of the plan of reorganization that were disposed of by other
    parties. Although we have been discharged of liabilities with
    respect to hazardous waste sites, we are under a continuing
    obligation to provide information with respect to our products
    to federal and state agencies. The A-C Reorganization Trust,
    under its mandate to provide plan of reorganization
    implementation services to us, has responded to these
    informational requests because pre-bankruptcy activities are
    involved.

 

    We were advised in late 2005 that the A-C Reorganization Trust
    is in the process of terminating and distributing its assets,
    and as a result, we will assume the responsibility of responding
    to claimants and to the EPA and state agencies previously
    undertaken by the A-C Reorganization Trust. However, we have
    been advised by the A-C Reorganization Trust that its cost of
    providing these services has not been material in the past, and
    therefore we do not expect to incur material expenses as a
    result of responding to such requests. However, there can be no
    assurance that we will not be subject to environmental claims
    relating to pre-bankruptcy activities that would have a material
    adverse effect on us.

 

    We are named as a defendant from time to time in product
    liability lawsuits alleging personal injuries resulting from our
    activities prior to our reorganization involving asbestos. These
    claims are referred to and handled by a special products
    liability trust formed to be responsible for such claims in
    connection with our reorganization. As with environmental
    claims, we do not believe we are liable for product liability
    claims relating to our business prior to our bankruptcy;
    moreover, the products liability trust continues to defend all
    such claims. However, there can be no assurance that we will not
    be subject to material product liability claims in the future.

 

    We are involved in various other legal proceedings, including
    labor contract litigation, in the ordinary course of business.
    The legal proceedings are at different stages; however, we
    believe that the likelihood of material loss relating to any
    such legal proceedings is remote.



    28



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 4.  


SUBMISSION
    OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS




 

    On November 28, 2006, we held our Annual Meeting of
    Stockholders. At the meeting, the stockholders voted on the
    following matters:

 

    1. The election of nine directors to serve a one-year term
    expiring at the 2007 annual meeting of stockholders.

 

    2. The ratification of the appointment of UHY LLP as our
    independent auditor for the fiscal year ending December 31,
    2006.

 

    3. The adoption of our 2006 Incentive Stock Plan.

 

    The nine nominees to our Board of Directors were elected at the
    meeting, and the other proposals received the affirmative vote
    required for approval. The number of votes cast for, against or
    withheld, as well as the number of abstentions and broker
    non-votes, were as follows:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Against or



 


 


Abstentions and



 




 


 


 


 


 


For


 


 


Withheld


 


 


Broker Non-votes


 



 




 


    1.


 


 


Election of
    Directors



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Ali H. M. Afdhal
    


 


 


    18,981,441


 


 


 


    339,698


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Alejandro P. Bulgheroni
    


 


 


    18,791,812


 


 


 


    529,327


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Carlos A. Bulgheroni
    


 


 


    18,791,762


 


 


 


    529,377


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Jeffrey R. Freedman
    


 


 


    17,759,199


 


 


 


    1,561,940


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Victor F. Germack
    


 


 


    19,170,055


 


 


 


    151,084


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Munawar H. Hidayatallah
    


 


 


    19,096,922


 


 


 


    224,217


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


John E. McConnaughy, Jr. 
    


 


 


    18,353,294


 


 


 


    967,845


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Robert E. Nederlander
    


 


 


    19,009,582


 


 


 


    311,557


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


Leonard Toboroff
    


 


 


    18,791,812


 


 


 


    529,327


 


 


 


 


 




 


    2.


 


 


Ratification of UHY LLP as our
    independent accountants
    


 


 


    19,269,608


 


 


 


    42,267


 


 


 


    9,264


 




 


    3.


 


 


Adoption of 2006 Incentive Stock
    Plan
    


 


 


    7,811,990


 


 


 


    3,618,967


 


 


 


    7,863,905


 






 

PART II



 







ITEM 5.  


MARKET
    FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER
    MATTERS.




 

MARKET
    PRICE INFORMATION

 

    Our common stock is traded on the American Stock Exchange under
    the symbol “ALY”. The following table sets forth, for
    periods indicated, the range of high and low sale prices of our
    common stock reported on the American Stock Exchange.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




Calendar Quarter



 


High


 


 


Low


 



 





2005



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





First Quarter
    



 


    $


    7.25


 


 


    $


    3.64


 





Second Quarter
    



 


 


    6.00


 


 


 


    4.38


 





Third Quarter
    



 


 


    14.70


 


 


 


    5.65


 





Fourth Quarter
    



 


 


    13.75


 


 


 


    8.61


 





2006



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





First Quarter
    



 


    $


    18.50


 


 


    $


    12.46


 





Second Quarter
    



 


 


    17.62


 


 


 


    10.85


 





Third Quarter
    



 


 


    19.33


 


 


 


    9.80


 





Fourth Quarter
    



 


 


    25.55


 


 


 


    12.15


 







    29



Table of Contents


Holders

 

    As of March 1, 2007, there were approximately 1,927 holders
    of record of our common stock. On March 1, 2007, the
    closing price for our common stock reported on the American
    Stock Exchange was $15.99 per share.

 

Dividends

 

    No dividends were declared or paid during the past three years,
    and no dividends are anticipated to be declared or paid in the
    foreseeable future. Our credit facilities and the indentures
    governing our senior notes restrict our ability to pay dividends
    on our common stock.

 

EQUITY
    COMPENSATION PLAN INFORMATION

 

    The following table provides information as of December 31,
    2006 with respect to the shares of our common stock that may be
    issued under our existing equity compensation plans.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Number of



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Securities to be



 


 


Weighted



 


 


 


 




 


 


Issued Upon



 


 


Average Exercise



 


 


Number of Securities



 




 


 


Exercise of



 


 


Price of



 


 


Remaining Available



 




 


 


Outstanding



 


 


Outstanding



 


 


for Future Issuance



 




 


 


Options, Warrants



 


 


Options, Warrants



 


 


Under Equity



 





Plan Category



 


and Rights


 


 


and Rights


 


 


Compensation Plans


 



 





Equity compensation plans approved
    by security holders
    



 


 


    1,346,365


 


 


    $


    6.86


 


 


 


    1,726,000


 





Equity compensation plans not
    approved by security holders
    



 


 


    8,000


 


 


    $


    9.20


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


 


    1,354,365


 


 


    $


    6.87


 


 


 


    1,726,000


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Equity
    Compensation Plans Not Approved By Security Holders

 

    These plans comprise the following:

 

    In 1999 and 2000, the Board compensated former and continuing
    Board members who had served from 1989 to March 31, 1999
    without compensation by issuing promissory notes totaling
    $325,000 and by granting stock options to these same
    individuals. Options to purchase 4,800 shares of common
    stock were granted with an exercise price of $13.75. These
    options vested immediately and expire in March 2010. As of
    December 31, 2006, 4,000 of these options remain
    outstanding.

 

    In connection with the private placement in April 2004, we
    issued warrants for the purchase of 800,000 shares of our
    common stock at an exercise price of $2.50 per share. A
    total of 486,557 of these warrants were exercised in 2005 and
    the remaining warrants were exercised in 2006. Warrants for
    4,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $4.65 were also issued in May 2004 and remained outstanding as
    of December 31, 2006. The warrants were exercised in
    January 2007.



    30



Table of Contents


PERFORMANCE
    GRAPH

 

    Set forth below is a line graph comparing the annual percentage
    change in the cumulative return to the stockholders of our
    common stock with the cumulative return of the Nasdaq Market
    Index and the CoreData Services Oil and Gas Equipment and
    Services Index for the period commencing January 1, 2001
    and ending on December 31, 2006. The CoreData Services Oil
    and Gas Equipment and Services Index is an index of
    approximately 75 oil and gas equipment and services providers.
    The information contained in the performance graph shall not be
    deemed to be “soliciting material” or to be
    “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be
    incorporated by reference into any future filing under the
    Securities Act or Exchange Act, except to the extent that we
    specifically incorporate it by reference into such filing.

 

    The graph assumes that $100 was invested on January 1, 2001
    in our common stock and in each index, and that all dividends
    were reinvested. No dividends have been declared or paid on our
    common stock. Stockholder returns over the indicated period
    should not be considered indicative of future shareholder
    returns.

 

COMPARISON
    OF 5-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN


AMONG ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY INC.


NASDAQ MARKET INDEX AND OIL & GAS EQUIPMENT/SERVICES

 

 

 

ASSUMES $100
    INVESTED ON JAN. 1, 2001
    


    ASSUMES DIVIDEND REINVESTED


    FISCAL YEAR ENDING DEC. 31, 2006

 

COMPARISON
    OF CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN OF ONE OR MORE
    COMPANIES, PEER GROUPS, INDUSTRY INDEXES AND/OR BROAD
    MARKETS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Fiscal Year Ending




  Company/Index/Market


 


12/31/2001


 


12/31/2002


 


12/31/2003


 


12/31/2004


 


12/30/2005


 


12/29/2006





Allis-Chalmers Energy
    Inc. 
    



 


 


100.00


 


 


 


53.68


 


 


 


54.74


 


 


 


103.16


 


 


 


262.53


 


 


 


485.05


 





Oil & Gas
    Equipment/Services



 


 


100.00


 


 


 


93.04


 


 


 


113.49


 


 


 


155.77


 


 


 


235.41


 


 


 


277.90


 





NASDAQ Market Index



 


 


100.00


 


 


 


69.75


 


 


 


104.88


 


 


 


113.70


 


 


 


116.19


 


 


 


128.12


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    31



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 6.  


SELECTED
    FINANCIAL DATA.




 

    The following selected historical financial information for each
    of the five years ended December 31, 2006, has been derived
    from our audited consolidated financial statements and related
    notes. This information is only a summary and should be read in
    conjunction with material contained in “Management’s
    Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
    Operations,” which includes a discussion of factors
    materially affecting the comparability of the information
    presented, and in conjunction with our financial statements
    included elsewhere herein. As discussed in Item 7,
    “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
    Condition and Results of Operations,” we have during the
    past five years effected a number of business combinations and
    other transactions that materially affect the comparability of
    the information set forth below (in thousands, except per share
    amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,




 


 


2006


 


2005


 


2004


 


2003


 


2002




 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 


(Restated)


 


 



 





Statement of Operations
    Data



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    307,304


 


 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    32,724


 


 


    $


    17,990


 





Income (loss) from operations
    



 


    $


    66,656


 


 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    4,227


 


 


    $


    2,625


 


 


    $


    (1,072


    )





Net income (loss) from continuing
    operations
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 


 


    $


    2,927


 


 


    $


    (3,969


    )





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common stockholders
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 


 


    $


    2,271


 


 


    $


    (4,290


    )





Per Share Data:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net Income (loss) from continuing
    operations per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    1.73


 


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.58


 


 


    $


    (1.14


    )





Diluted
    



 


    $


    1.66


 


 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    (1.14


    )





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    20,548


 


 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 


 


 


    3,927


 


 


 


    3,766


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    21,410


 


 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 


 


 


    5,850


 


 


 


    3,766


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Consolidated Balance Sheet Data





 


 


As of December 31,




 


 


2006


 


2005


 


2004


 


2003


 


2002




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 


 



 





Total assets
    



 


    $


    908,326


 


 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 


 


    $


    53,662


 


 


    $


    34,778


 





Long-term debt classified as:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Current
    



 


    $


    6,999


 


 


    $


    5,632


 


 


    $


    5,541


 


 


    $


    3,992


 


 


    $


    13,890


 





Long-term
    



 


    $


    561,446


 


 


    $


    54,937


 


 


    $


    24,932


 


 


    $


    28,241


 


 


    $


    7,331


 





Redeemable convertible Preferred
    stock
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    4,171


 


 


    $


    3,821


 





Stockholders’ equity
    



 


    $


    253,933


 


 


    $


    60,875


 


 


    $


    35,109


 


 


    $


    4,541


 


 


    $


    1,009


 





Book value per share (basic)
    



 


    $


    12.36


 


 


    $


    4.10


 


 


    $


    4.43


 


 


    $


    1.16


 


 


    $


    0.27


 






 







ITEM 7.  


MANAGEMENT’S
    DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
    OPERATIONS




 

The following discussion and analysis should be read in
    conjunction with our selected historical financial data and our
    accompanying financial statements and the notes to those
    financial statements included elsewhere in this document. The
    following discussion contains forward-looking statements within
    the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
    1995 that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual
    results could differ materially from those anticipated in these
    forward-looking statements as a result of risks and
    uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those discussed
    under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”



    32



Table of Contents

 

Overview
    of Our Business

 

    We are a multi-faceted oilfield services company that provides
    services and equipment to oil and natural gas exploration and
    production companies, domestically in Texas, Louisiana, New
    Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah, Wyoming,
    Arkansas, Alabama, West Virginia, offshore in the Gulf of
    Mexico, and internationally, primarily in Argentina and Mexico.
    We operate in six sectors of the oil and natural gas service
    industry: rental tools, international drilling, directional
    drilling services; casing and tubing services; compressed air
    drilling services; and production services.

 

    We derive operating revenues from rates per job that we charge
    for the labor and equipment required to provide a service and
    rates per day for equipment and tools that we rent to our
    customers. The price we charge for our services depends upon
    several factors, including the level of oil and natural gas
    drilling activity and the competitive environment in the
    particular geographic regions in which we operate. Contracts are
    awarded based on the price, quality of service and equipment,
    and the general reputation and experience of our personnel. The
    demand for drilling services has historically been volatile and
    is affected by the capital expenditures of oil and natural gas
    exploration and development companies, which can fluctuate based
    upon the prices of oil and natural gas or the expectation for
    the prices of oil and natural gas.

 

    The number of working drilling rigs, typically referred to as
    the “rig count,” is an important indicator of activity
    levels in the oil and natural gas industry. The rig count in the
    United States increased from 862 as of December 31, 2002 to
    1,752 as of March 2, 2007, according to the Baker Hughes
    rig count. Furthermore, directional and horizontal rig counts
    increased from 283 as of December 31, 2002 to 738 as of
    March 2, 2007, which accounted for 33% and 42% of the total
    U.S. rig count, respectively.

 

    Our cost of revenues represents all direct and indirect costs
    associated with the operation and maintenance of our equipment.
    The principal elements of these costs are direct and indirect
    labor and benefits, repairs and maintenance of our equipment,
    insurance, equipment rentals, fuel and depreciation. Operating
    expenses do not fluctuate in direct proportion to changes in
    revenues because, among other factors, we have a fixed base of
    inventory of equipment and facilities to support our operations,
    and in periods of low drilling activity we may also seek to
    preserve labor continuity to market our services and maintain
    our equipment.

 

Cyclical
    Nature of Equipment Rental and Services Industry

 

    The oilfield services industry is highly cyclical. The most
    critical factor in assessing the outlook for the industry is the
    worldwide supply and demand for oil and the domestic supply and
    demand for natural gas. The peaks and valleys of demand are
    further apart than those of many other cyclical industries. This
    is primarily a result of the industry being driven by commodity
    demand and corresponding price increases. As demand increases,
    producers raise their prices. The price escalation enables
    producers to increase their capital expenditures. The increased
    capital expenditures ultimately result in greater revenues and
    profits for services and equipment companies. The increased
    capital expenditures also ultimately result in greater
    production which historically has resulted in increased supplies
    and reduced prices.

 

    Demand for our services has been strong throughout 2004, 2005
    and 2006 due to high oil and natural gas prices and increased
    demand and declining production costs for natural gas as
    compared to other energy sources. Management believes the
    current market fundamentals are indicative of a favorable
    long-term trend of activity in our markets. However, these
    factors could be more than offset by other developments
    affecting the worldwide supply and demand for oil and natural
    gas products.

 

Restatement

 

    We understated diluted earnings per share due to an incorrect
    calculation of our weighted shares outstanding for each of the
    first three quarters of 2004, for the year ended
    December 31, 2004 and for the quarter ended March 31,
    2005. In addition, we understated basic earnings per share due
    to an incorrect calculation of our weighted average basic shares
    outstanding for the quarter ended September 30, 2004.
    Consequently, we restated our financial statements for each of
    those periods. The incorrect calculation resulted from a
    mathematical error and an improper application of Statement of
    Financial Accounting Standards No. 128, “Earnings
    Per Share”, or SFAS, No. 128. The effect of the
    restatement was to reduce weighted average diluted shares
    outstanding for the relevant periods and to reduce weighted
    average basic shares



    33



Table of Contents


    outstanding for the quarter ended September 30, 2004.
    Therefore, diluted earnings per share were increased for the
    relevant periods and basic earnings per share were increased for
    the quarter ended September 30, 2004. (See Note 2 to
    our consolidated financial statements for the three years ended
    December 31, 2006).

 

    In connection with the formation of AirComp in 2003, we, along
    with M-I
    contributed assets to AirComp in exchange for a 55% interest and
    45% interest, respectively, in AirComp. We originally accounted
    for the formation of AirComp as a joint venture, but in February
    2005 determined that the transaction should have been accounted
    for using purchase accounting pursuant to
    SFAS No. 141, “Business Combinations”
    and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 51
    “Accounting for Sales of Stock by a Subsidiary.”
    Consequently, we restated our financial statements for the
    first three quarters of 2004 (See Note 2 to our
    consolidated financial statements for the three years ended
    December 31, 2006).

 

Results
    of Operations

 

    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of Tubular and
    we acquired Safco. In November 2004, AirComp acquired
    substantially all of the assets of Diamond Air and, in December
    2004, we acquired Downhole. We consolidated the results of these
    acquisitions from the day they were acquired.

 

    In April 2005, we acquired Delta and, in May 2005, we acquired
    Capcoil. We report the operations of Downhole and Capcoil as our
    production services segment and the operations of Safco and
    Delta as our rental tools segment. In July 2005, we acquired the
    45% interest of
    M-I in our
    compressed air drilling subsidiary, AirComp, making us the 100%
    owner of AirComp. In addition, in July 2005, we acquired the
    compressed air drilling assets of W. T. On August 1, 2005,
    we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital stock of Target. The
    results of Target are included in our directional drilling
    segment as their measurement while drilling equipment is
    utilized in that segment. On September 1, 2005, we acquired
    the casing and tubing service assets of Patterson Services, Inc.
    We consolidated the results of these acquisitions from the day
    they were acquired.

 

    In January 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty and in December 2006, we acquired substantially all of
    the assets of OGR. We report the operations of Specialty and OGR
    in our rental tool segment. In April 2006, we acquired all of
    the outstanding stock of Rogers. We report the operations of
    Rogers in our casing and tubing services segment. In August
    2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of DLS and in
    December 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Tanus. We report the operations of DLS and Tanus in our
    international drilling segment. In October 2006, we acquired all
    of the outstanding stock of Petro Rentals. We report the
    operations of Petro Rentals in our production services segment.
    We consolidated the results of these acquisitions from the day
    they were acquired.

 

    The foregoing acquisitions affect the comparability from period
    to period of our historical results, and our historical results
    may not be indicative of our future results.

 

Comparison
    of Years Ended December 31, 2006 and December 31,
    2005

 

    Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2006 was
    $307.3 million, an increase of 191.7% compared to
    $105.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005.
    Revenues increased in all of our business segments due to the
    successful integration of acquisitions completed in the third
    quarter of 2005 and during 2006, the investment in new
    equipment, improved pricing for our services, the addition of
    operations and sales personnel and the opening of new operations
    offices. Revenues increased most significantly due to the
    acquisition of DLS on August 14, 2006 which expanded our
    operations to a sixth operating segment, international drilling.
    Revenues also increased significantly at our rental tools
    segment due to the acquisition of Specialty effective
    January 1, 2006. Our casing and tubing services segment
    also had a substantial increase in revenue, primarily due to the
    acquisitions of the casing and tubing assets of Patterson
    Services, Inc. on September 1, 2005, and the acquisition of
    Rogers as of April 1, 2006, along with the investment in
    additional equipment, improved market conditions and increased
    market penetration for our services in South Texas, East Texas,
    Louisiana and the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. Revenues increased
    at our compressed air drilling segment due to the purchase of
    additional equipment and improved pricing for our services. Our
    directional drilling services segment revenues increased in the
    2006 period compared to the 2005 period due to improved pricing
    for directional drilling services, the August 2005 acquisition
    of Target which provides measurement-while-drilling tools, or
    MWD and the purchase of additional down-hole motors and MWDs
    which increased our capacity and market presence.



    34



Table of Contents

 

    Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2006
    increased 243.8% to $105.1 million, or 34.2% of revenues,
    compared to $30.6 million, or 29.0%, of revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in gross profit
    is due to the increase in revenues in all of our business
    segments. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of
    revenues is primarily due to the acquisition of Specialty as of
    January 1, 2006, in the high margin rental tool business,
    the improved pricing for our services generally and the
    investments in new capital equipment. Also contributing to our
    improved gross profit margin was the acquisition of Target, the
    purchase of additional MWD’s and the acquisition of Rogers.
    The increase in gross profit was partially offset by an increase
    in depreciation expense of 315.7% to $20.3 million compared
    to $4.9 million for 2005. The increase is due to additional
    depreciable assets resulting from the acquisitions and capital
    expenditures. Our cost of revenues consists principally of our
    labor costs and benefits, equipment rentals, maintenance and
    repairs of our equipment, depreciation, insurance and fuel.
    Because many of our costs are fixed, our gross profit as a
    percentage of revenues is generally affected by our level of
    revenues.

 

    General and administrative expense was $35.5 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to
    $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2005.
    General and administrative expense increased due to additional
    expenses associated with the acquisitions, and the hiring of
    additional sales, operations and administrative personnel.
    General and administrative expense also increased because of
    increased accounting and consulting fees and other expenses in
    connection with initiatives to strengthen our internal control
    processes, costs related to Sarbanes Oxley compliance efforts
    and increased corporate accounting and administrative staff. As
    a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses
    were 11.6% in 2006 compared to 14.8% in 2005.

 

    We adopted SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payment,
    effective January 1, 2006. This statement requires all
    share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee
    stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements
    based on their grant-date fair values. We adopted
    SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective
    transition method, utilizing the Black-Scholes option pricing
    model for the calculation of the fair value of our employee
    stock options. Under the modified prospective method, we record
    compensation cost related to unvested stock awards as of
    December 31, 2005 by recognizing the unamortized grant date
    fair value of these awards over the remaining vesting periods of
    those awards with no change in historical reported earnings.
    Therefore, we recorded an expense of $3.4 million related
    to stock awards for the year ended December 31, 2006 of
    which $3.0 million was recorded in general and
    administrative expense with the balance being recorded as a
    direct cost. Prior to January 1, 2006, we accounted for our
    stock-based compensation using Accounting Principle Board
    Opinion No. 25, or APB No. 25. Under APB No. 25,
    compensation expense is recognized for stock options with an
    exercise price that is less than the market price on the grant
    date of the option. Accordingly, no compensation cost was
    recognized under APB No. 25.

 

    Amortization expense was $2.9 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 compared to $1.8 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in amortization
    expense is due to the amortization of intangible assets in
    connection with our acquisitions and the amortization of
    deferred financing costs which included approximately
    $1.1 million.

 

    Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2006
    totaled $66.7 million, a 404.3% increase over the
    $13.2 million in income from operations for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, reflecting the increase in our revenues
    and gross profit, offset in part by increased general and
    administrative expenses. Our income from operations as a
    percentage of revenues increased to 21.7% in 2006 from 12.5% in
    2005 due to the increase in our gross margin which offset the
    increases in amortization expense and general and administrative
    expenses.

 

    Our net interest expense was $19.3 million for the year
    ended December 31, 2006, compared to $4.4 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2005. Interest expense
    increased in 2006 due to our increased debt. In January of 2006
    we issued $160.0 million of senior notes bearing interest
    at 9.0% to fund the acquisition of Specialty, pay off other
    outstanding debt and for working capital. In August 2006 we
    issued an additional $95.0 million of senior notes bearing
    interest at 9.0% to fund a portion of the acquisition of DLS. On
    December 18, 2006, we borrowed $300.0 million in a
    senior unsecured bridge loan to fund the acquisition of OGR. The
    average interest rate on the bridge loan was approximately
    10.6%. Interest expense for 2006 includes the write-off of
    $453,000 related to financing fees on the bridge loan. This
    bridge loan was repaid on



    35



Table of Contents


    January 29, 2007 and the remaining $1.2 million of
    financing fees will be written off in 2007. In the third quarter
    of 2005, we incurred debt retirement expense of
    $1.1 million related to the refinancing of our debt. This
    amount includes prepayment penalties and the write-off of
    deferred financing fees from a previous financing.

 

    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 was $0 compared to $488,000 for the
    corresponding period in 2005 due to the our acquisition of the
    minority interest at AirComp on July 11, 2005.

 

    Our provision for income taxes for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 was $11.4 million, or 24.3% of our
    net income before income taxes, compared to $1.3 million,
    or 15.8% of our net income before income taxes for 2005. The
    increase in our provision for income taxes is attributable to
    the significant increase in our operating income which resulted
    in the utilization of our deferred tax assets including our net
    operating losses, and the increase in percentage of income taxes
    to net income before income taxes attributable to our operations
    in Argentina which are taxed at 35.0%.

 

    We had net income attributed to common stockholders of
    $35.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, an
    increase of 396.5%, compared to net income attributed to common
    stockholders of $7.2 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005.

 

    The following table compares revenues and income from operations
    for each of our business segments for the years ended
    December 31, 2006 and December 31, 2005. Income from
    operations consists of our revenues less cost of revenues,
    general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and
    amortization:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Revenues


 


 


Income (Loss) from Operations


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


Change


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


Change


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    51,521


 


 


    $


    5,059


 


 


    $


    46,462


 


 


    $


    26,293


 


 


    $


    1,300


 


 


    $


    24,993


 





International drilling
    



 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    12,233


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    72,811


 


 


 


    43,901


 


 


 


    28,910


 


 


 


    17,666


 


 


 


    7,389


 


 


 


    10,277


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    50,887


 


 


 


    20,932


 


 


 


    29,955


 


 


 


    12,544


 


 


 


    4,994


 


 


 


    7,550


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    43,045


 


 


 


    25,662


 


 


 


    17,383


 


 


 


    10,810


 


 


 


    5,612


 


 


 


    5,198


 





Production services
    



 


 


    19,550


 


 


 


    9,790


 


 


 


    9,760


 


 


 


    2,137


 


 


 


    (99


    )


 


 


    2,236


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (15,027


    )


 


 


    (5,978


    )


 


 


    (9,049


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    307,304


 


 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    201,960


 


 


    $


    66,656


 


 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    53,438


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Rental Tools Segment.  Our rental tools
    revenues were $51.5 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006, an increase from the $5.1 million
    in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2005. Income
    from operations increased to $26.3 million in 2006 compared
    to $1.3 million in 2005. The increase in revenue and
    operating income is primarily attributable to the acquisition of
    Specialty effective January 1, 2006, improved pricing,
    improved utilization of our inventory of rental equipment and to
    a lesser extent, the acquisition of the OGR assets in December
    2006.

 

International Drilling Segment.  Our
    international drilling revenues were $69.5 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2006, and our income from
    operations was $12.2 million. This segment of our
    operations was created with the acquisition of DLS in August of
    2006. In November 2006, our DLS employees were involved in a
    ten-day
    labor strike in Argentina, which affected the entire oil
    industry in Argentina and had a negative impact on our results.

 

Directional Drilling Services
    Segment.  Revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 for our directional drilling services
    segment were $72.8 million, an increase of 65.9% from the
    $43.9 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005. Income from operations increased 139.1%
    to $17.7 million for 2006 from $7.4 million for 2005.
    The improved results for this segment are due to the increase in
    drilling activity in the Texas and Gulf Coast areas, improved
    pricing, the acquisition of Target as of August 1, 2005



    36



Table of Contents


    and the purchase of an additional six MWDs. Our increased
    operating expenses as a result of the addition of operations and
    personnel were more than offset by the growth in revenues and
    improved pricing for our services

 

Casing and Tubing Services Segment.  Revenues
    for the year ended December 31, 2006 for the casing and
    tubing services segment were $50.9 million, an increase of
    143.1% from the $20.9 million in revenues for the year
    ended December 31, 2005. Revenues from domestic operations
    increased to $44.4 million in 2006 from $14.5 million
    in 2005 as a result of the acquisition of Rogers, the
    acquisition of the casing and tubing assets of Patterson
    Services, Inc. on September 1, 2005 and investment in new
    equipment, all of which resulted in increased market penetration
    for our services in South Texas, East Texas, Louisiana and the
    U.S. Gulf of Mexico. The year ended December 2005 was also
    adversely impacted by hurricane activity in September of 2005.
    Revenues from Mexican operations increased to $6.5 million
    in 2006 from $6.4 million in 2005. Income from operations
    increased 151.2% to $12.5 million in 2006 from
    $5.0 million in 2005. The increase in this segment’s
    operating income is due to increased revenues both domestically
    and in our Mexico operations.

 

Compressed Air Drilling Services Segment.  Our
    compressed air drilling revenues were $43.0 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2006, an increase of 67.7% compared
    to $25.7 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005. Income from operations increased 92.6%
    to $10.8 million in 2006 compared to income from operations
    of $5.6 million in 2005. Our compressed air drilling
    revenues and operating income for the 2006 period increased
    compared to the 2005 period due in part to the acquisition of
    the air drilling assets of W. T., our investment in additional
    equipment and improved pricing in West Texas.

 

Production Services Segment.  Our production
    services revenues were $19.6 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006, compared to $9.8 million in
    revenues for the year ended December 31, 2005. Income from
    operations was $2.1 million in 2006 compared to a loss from
    operations of $99,000 in 2005. The increase in revenue is
    attributable to the acquisition of Petro-Rentals completed in
    October 2006, the acquisition of Capcoil on May 1, 2005 and
    improved utilization and pricing for our services. The increase
    in operating income is primarily related to the operations of
    Petro-Rentals and the addition of two coil tubing units in the
    fourth quarter of 2006.

 

Comparison
    of Years Ended December 31, 2005 and December 31,
    2004

 

    Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2005 was
    $105.3 million, an increase of 120.7% compared to
    $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2004.
    The increase in revenues was principally due to acquisitions
    completed in the fourth quarter of 2004 and the second and third
    quarters of 2005, the addition of operations and sales
    personnel, the opening of new operations offices, and the
    purchase of additional equipment. Acquisitions completed during
    this period enabled us to establish our rental tool and
    production services segments which resulted in an increased
    offering of products and services and an expansion of our
    customer base.

 

    Directional drilling services segment revenues increased in the
    2005 period compared to the 2004 period due to the addition of
    operations and sales personnel, the opening of new operations
    offices and the purchase of additional downhole motors which
    increased our capacity and market presence. Revenues increased
    at our compressed air drilling segment due to acquisition of the
    air drilling assets of W. T. on July 11, 2005, the
    acquisitions of Diamond Air on November 1, 2004 and
    improved pricing for our services in West Texas. Revenues
    increased at our casing and tubing services segment due to the
    acquisition of the casing and tubing assets of Patterson
    Services Inc. on September 1, 2005, increased revenues from
    Mexico, improved market conditions, improved market penetration
    for our services in South Texas and the addition of operating
    personnel and equipment which broadened our capabilities. Also
    contributing to increased revenues were the acquisitions of
    Safco as of September 1, 2004, Downhole as of
    December 1, 2004, Delta as of April 1, 2005 and
    Capcoil as of May 1, 2005. Downhole and Capcoil comprised
    our production services segment and Safco and Delta comprised
    our rental tool segment

 

    Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2005
    increased 146.1% to $30.6 million, or 29.0% of revenues,
    compared to $12.4 million, or 26.0%, of revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. The increase is due to
    increased revenues and improved pricing in the directional
    drilling services segment,



    37



Table of Contents


    increased revenues at our compressed air drilling services
    segment, including revenues resulting from the acquisition of
    Diamond Air and the compressed air drilling assets of W.T.,
    increased revenues from Mexico, improved market conditions for
    our domestic casing and tubing segment and the growth of our
    rental tools segment through the acquisition of Delta on
    April 1, 2005. Depreciation expense increased 80.4% to
    $4.9 million in 2005 compared to $2.7 million in 2004.
    The increase is due to additional depreciable assets resulting
    from capital expenditures and acquisitions in 2004 and 2005. Our
    cost of revenues consists principally of our labor costs and
    benefits, equipment rentals, maintenance and repairs of our
    equipment, depreciation, insurance and fuel. Because many of our
    costs are fixed, our gross profit as a percentage of revenues is
    generally affected by our level of revenues.

 

    General and administrative expense was $15.6 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to
    $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2004.
    General and administrative expense increased due to the
    additional expenses associated with the acquisitions completed
    in the second half of 2004 and in 2005, and the hiring of
    additional sales and administrative personnel. General and
    administrative expense also increased because of increased legal
    and accounting fees and other expenses related to our financing
    and acquisition activities, increased consulting fees in
    connection with our internal controls and corporate governance
    process, and increased corporate accounting and administrative
    staff. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative
    expenses were 14.8% for 2005 and 15.3% for 2004.

 

    Amortization expense was $1.8 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 compared to $0.9 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in amortization
    expense is due to the amortization of intangible assets in
    connection with our acquisitions and the amortization of
    deferred financing costs.

 

    Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2005
    totaled $13.2 million, a 212.7% increase over the
    $4.2 million in income from operations for the year ended
    December 31, 2004, reflecting the increase in our revenues
    and gross profit, offset in part by increased general and
    administrative expenses.

 

    Our interest expense was $4.4 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, compared to $2.8 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. Interest expense increased
    during 2005 due to the increased borrowings associated with the
    acquisitions completed in the second and third quarters of 2005,
    equipment purchases and higher average interest rates, offset in
    part by the prepayment, in December 2004, of our 12%
    $2.4 million subordinated note. Additionally, in 2005, we
    incurred debt retirement expense of $1.1 million related to
    the refinancing of our debt. This amount includes prepayment
    penalties and the write-off of deferred financing fees from a
    previous financing.

 

    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 was $488,000 compared to $321,000 for the
    corresponding period in 2004 due to the increase in
    profitability at AirComp due in part to the acquisition of
    Diamond Air as of November 1, 2004. The minority interest
    at AirComp was acquired on July 11, 2005 and the minority
    interest in Tubular, which was 19%-owned by director Jens
    Mortensen, was acquired on September 30, 2004.

 

    We had net income attributed to common stockholders of
    $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2005, an
    increase of 839.1%, compared to net income attributed to common
    stockholders of $0.8 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. The net income attributed to common
    stockholders in the 2004 period is after $124,000 in preferred
    stock dividends.



    38



Table of Contents

 

    The following table compares revenues and income from operations
    for each of our business segments for the years ended
    December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004. Income from
    operations consists of our revenues less cost of revenues,
    general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and
    amortization:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Revenues


 


 


Income (Loss) from Operations


 




 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


Change


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


Change


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    5,059


 


 


    $


    611


 


 


    $


    4,448


 


 


    $


    1,300


 


 


    $


    (71


    )


 


    $


    1,371


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    43,901


 


 


 


    24,787


 


 


 


    19,114


 


 


 


    7,389


 


 


 


    3,061


 


 


 


    4,328


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    20,932


 


 


 


    10,391


 


 


 


    10,541


 


 


 


    4,994


 


 


 


    3,217


 


 


 


    1,777


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    25,662


 


 


 


    11,561


 


 


 


    14,101


 


 


 


    5,612


 


 


 


    1,169


 


 


 


    4,443


 





Production services
    



 


 


    9,790


 


 


 


    376


 


 


 


    9,414


 


 


 


    (99


    )


 


 


    4


 


 


 


    (103


    )





General corporate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (5,978


    )


 


 


    (3,153


    )


 


 


    (2,825


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 


 


    $


    57,618


 


 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    4,227


 


 


    $


    8,991


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Rental Tools Segment.  Our rental tools
    revenues were $5.1 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, an increase of 728.0% compared to
    $0.6 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. Income from operations increased to
    $1.3 million in 2005 compared to a loss from operations of
    $71,000 in 2004. Operations for this segment include Safco,
    acquired in September 2004, and Delta, acquired in April 2005.

 

Directional Drilling Services
    Segment.  Revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 for our directional drilling services
    segment were $43.9 million, an increase of 77.1% from the
    $24.8 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. Income from operations increased 141.4%
    to $7.4 million for 2005 from $3.1 million for 2004.
    The improved results for this segment are due to the increase in
    drilling activity in the Texas and Gulf Coast areas, the
    establishment of new operations in West Texas and Oklahoma, the
    addition of operations and sales personnel, the purchase of
    additional downhole motors which increased our capacity and
    market presence and the acquisition of Target, a provider of
    measurement while drilling equipment, effective August 2005. Our
    operating income increased due to higher revenue explained above
    and cost savings achieved as a result of the purchases of most
    of the downhole motors used in directional drilling, which we
    had previously rented.

 

Casing and Tubing Services Segment.  Revenues
    for the year ended December 31, 2005 for the casing and
    tubing services segment were $20.9 million, an increase of
    101.4% from the $10.4 million in revenues for the year
    ended December 31, 2004. Revenues from domestic operations
    increased to $14.5 million in 2005 from $5.2 million
    in 2004 as a result of the acquisition of the casing and tubing
    assets of Patterson Services, Inc. on September 1, 2005,
    improved market conditions for our services in South Texas and
    the addition of personnel which added to our capabilities and
    our offering of services. Revenues from Mexican operations
    increased to $6.4 million in 2005 from $5.2 million in
    2004 as a result of increased drilling activity in Mexico and
    the addition of equipment that increased our capacity. Income
    from operations increased 55.2% to $5.0 million in 2005
    from $3.2 million in 2004. The increase in this
    segment’s operating income is due to increased revenues
    both domestically and in our Mexico operations.

 

Compressed Air Drilling Services Segment.  Our
    compressed air drilling revenues were $25.7 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2005, an increase of 122.0%
    compared to $11.6 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2004. Income from operations increased 380.1%
    to $5.6 million in 2005 compared to income from operations
    of $1.2 million in 2004. Our compressed air drilling
    revenues and operating income for the 2005 period increased
    compared to the 2004 period due in part to the acquisition of
    the air drilling assets of W. T., the acquisitions of Diamond
    Air as of November 1, 2004 and improved pricing in West
    Texas.

 

Production Services Segment.  Our production
    services revenues were $9.8 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, compared to $376,000 in revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2004. Loss from operations was
    $99,000 in 2005 compared to an operating income of $4,000 in
    2004. Operations for this segment consist of Downhole, acquired
    December 1, 2004, and Capcoil, acquired May 1, 2005.
    Our results for the year ended December 31, 2005 for this
    segment were negatively affected by costs incurred to expand our



    39



Table of Contents


    international presence for production services and by downtime
    experienced by one of our larger coil tubing units.

 

Liquidity
    and Capital Resources

 

    Our on-going capital requirements arise primarily from our need
    to service our debt, to acquire and maintain equipment, to fund
    our working capital requirements and to complete acquisitions.
    Our primary sources of liquidity are proceeds from the issuance
    of debt and equity securities and cash flows from operations. We
    had cash and cash equivalents of $39.7 million at
    December 31, 2006 compared to $1.9 million at
    December 31, 2005.

 

Operating
    Activities

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2006, we generated
    $53.7 million in cash from operating activities. Net income
    for the year ended December 31, 2006 was
    $35.6 million. Non-cash additions to net income totaled
    $29.7 million in the 2006 period consisting primarily of
    $23.2 million of depreciation and amortization,
    $3.4 million related to the expensing of stock options as
    required under SFAS No. 123R, $2.2 million of
    deferred income tax, $781,000 for a provision for bad debts and
    $453,000 of amortization on the bridge loan fees, partially
    offset by $2.4 million of gain from the disposition of
    equipment.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2006, changes in working
    capital used $9.9 million in cash, principally due to an
    increase of $23.2 million in accounts receivable, a
    decrease of $2.3 million in accounts payable, offset in
    part by an increase of $11.4 million in accrued interest,
    an increase of $3.4 million in accrued employee benefits
    and payroll taxes and an increase of $872,000 in accrued
    expenses. Our accounts receivables increased at
    December 31, 2006 primarily due to the increase in our
    revenues in 2006. Accrued interest increased at
    December 31, 2006 due principally to interest accrued on
    our 9.0% senior notes which is payable semi-annually. Our
    accrued employee benefits and payroll taxes and other accrued
    expenses increased primarily due to the increase in costs due to
    our growth in revenues and acquisition completed in 2006.

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2005, we generated
    $3.6 million in cash from operating activities. Net income
    for the year ended December 31, 2005 was $7.2 million.
    Non-cash additions to net income totaled $7.4 million in
    the 2005 period consisting primarily of $6.7 million of
    depreciation and amortization, $488,000 of minority interest in
    the income of a subsidiary, $653,000 in write-off of financing
    fees in conjunction with a refinancing and $219,000 for a
    provision for bad debts and the $669,000 of gain from the
    disposition of equipment.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, changes in working
    capital used $11.0 million in cash, principally due to an
    increase of $10.7 million in accounts receivable, an
    increase of $2.1 million in other current assets, an
    increase in other assets of $936,000, a decrease in other
    liabilities of $266,000 and a decrease of $97,000 in accrued
    expenses, offset in part by an increase of $2.4 million in
    accounts payable, an increase of $324,000 in accrued interest
    and a increase of $443,000 in accrued employee benefits and
    payroll taxes. Our accounts receivables increased at
    December 31, 2005 due primarily to the increase in our
    revenues in 2005. Other current assets increased
    $2.1 million due primarily to an increase in inventory.
    Accounts payable increased by $2.4 million at
    December 31, 2005 due to the increase in our cost of sales
    associated with the increase in our revenues and the
    acquisitions completed in 2005 and 2004.

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2004, we generated
    $3.3 million in cash from operating activities. Net income
    before preferred stock dividend for the year ended
    December 31, 2004 was $888,000. Non-cash additions to net
    income totaled $4.4 million in the 2004 period consisting
    of $3.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $321,000
    of minority interest in the income of a subsidiary, $350,000 in
    amortization of discount on debt and $104,000 for a provision
    for bad debts.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2004, changes in working
    capital used $2.0 million in cash, principally due to an
    increase of $2.4 million in accounts receivable, an
    increase of $638,000 in other assets, and a decrease of $398,000
    in accrued expenses and other liabilities, offset in part by an
    increase of $1.1 million in accounts payable and an
    increase of $299,000 in accrued interest. Our accounts
    receivables increased at December 31, 2004 due primarily to
    the increase in our revenues in 2004. Current assets increased



    40



Table of Contents


    $638,000 due primarily to an increase in prepaid insurance
    premiums. Accounts payable increased by $1.1 million at
    December 31, 2004 due to the increase in our cost of sales
    associated with the increase in our revenues and the
    acquisitions completed in the fourth quarter of 2004.

 

Investing
    Activities

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2006, we used
    $559.4 million in investing activities consisting of six
    acquisitions and our capital expenditures. During the year ended
    December 31, 2006, we completed the following acquisitions
    for a total net cash outlay of $526.6 million, consisting
    of the purchase price and acquisition costs less cash acquired:

 







 
    • 


    Effective January 1, 2006, we acquired Specialty for a
    purchase price of $96.0 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    Effective April 1, 2006, we acquired Rogers for a purchase
    price of $11.3 million in cash, 125,285 shares of our
    common stock and a promissory note for $750,000.


 

 
    • 


    On August 14, 2006, we acquired DLS for a purchase price of
    $93.7 million in cash, 2.5 million shares of our
    common stock and the assumption of $9.1 million of
    indebtedness.


 

 
    • 


    On October 16, 2006, we acquired Petro Rentals for a
    purchase price of $20.2 million in cash,
    246,761 shares of our common stock and the payment of
    approximately $9.6 million of debt.


 

 
    • 


    Effective December 1, 2006, we acquired Tanus for a
    purchase price of $2.5 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    On December 18, 2006, we acquired substantially all of the
    assets of OGR for a purchase price of approximately
    $291.0 million in cash and 3.2 million shares of our
    common stock.



 

    In addition we made capital expenditures of approximately
    $39.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2006,
    including $4.5 million to replace
    “lost-in-hole”
    equipment and to increase our inventory of equipment in the
    rental tools segment, $5.8 million to purchase, improve and
    replace equipment in our international drilling segment,
    $5.1 million to purchase equipment for our directional
    drilling services segment, $7.7 million to purchase and
    improve equipment in our compressed air drilling service
    segment, $11.0 million to purchase and improve our casing
    equipment and approximately $5.3 million to expand our
    production services segment. We also received $6.9 million
    from the sale of assets during the year ended December 31,
    2006, comprised mostly from equipment
    “lost-in-hole”
    from our rental tools segment ($3.8 million) and our
    directional drilling segment ($1.8 million).

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, we used
    $53.1 million in investing activities. During the year
    ended December 31, 2005, we completed the following
    acquisitions for a total net cash outlay of $36.9 million,
    consisting of the purchase price and acquisition costs less cash
    acquired:

 







 
    • 


    On April 1, 2005 we acquired Delta for a purchase price of
    $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of our common
    stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000.


 

 
    • 


    On May 1, 2005, we acquired Capcoil for a purchase price of
    $2.7 million in cash, 168,161 shares of our common
    stock and the payment or assumption of approximately
    $1.3 million of debt.


 

 
    • 


    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T. for a purchase price of $6.0 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I it’s 45%
    interest in AirComp and subordinated note in the principal
    amount of $4.8 million issued by AirComp, for which we paid
    M-I $7.1 million in cash and reissued a $4.0 million
    subordinated note.


 

 
    • 


    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired Target for a purchase
    price of $1.3 million in cash and forgiveness of a lease
    receivable of $592,000.


 

 
    • 


    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for a purchase price
    of approximately $15.6 million.



 

    In addition we made capital expenditures of approximately
    $17.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2005,
    including $2.9 million to purchase equipment for our
    directional drilling services segment, $7.0 million to
    purchase and improve equipment in our compressed air drilling
    service segment, $5.2 million to purchase and improve our
    casing equipment and approximately $1.5 million to expand
    our production



    41



Table of Contents


    services segment. We also received $1.6 million from the
    sale of assets during the year ended December 31, 2005,
    comprised mostly from equipment lost in the hole from our
    directional drilling segment ($1.0 million) and our rental
    tool segment ($408,000).

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2004, we used
    $9.1 million in investing activities, consisting
    principally of capital expenditures of approximately
    $4.6 million, including $1.6 million to purchase
    equipment for our directional drilling services segment,
    $1.3 million to purchase casing equipment and
    $1.4 million to make capital repairs to existing equipment
    in our compressed air drilling services segment. During the year
    ended December 31, 2004, we completed the following
    acquisitions for a net cash outlay of $4.6 million.

 







 
    • 


    As of September 1, 2004 we completed, for
    $1.0 million, the acquisition of 100% of the outstanding
    stock of Safco.


 

 
    • 


    As of November 1, 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all
    the assets of Diamond Air for $4.6 million in cash and the
    assumption of approximately $450,000 of debt. We contributed our
    share of the purchase price, or $2.5 million, to AirComp in
    order to fund the purchase.


 

 
    • 


    Effective December 1, 2004, we acquired Downhole for
    approximately $1.1 million in cash, 568,466 shares of
    our common stock and payment or assumption of $950,000 of debt.



 

Financing
    Activities

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2006, financing
    activities provided a net of $543.6 million in cash. We
    received $557.8 million in borrowings under long-term debt
    facilities, consisting primarily of the issuance of
    $255.0 million of our 9.0% senior notes due 2014 and a
    $300.0 million senior unsecured bridge loan. The bridge
    loan, which was repaid on January 29, 2007, was used to
    fund the acquisition of OGR. We also received $46.3 million
    in net proceeds from the issuance of 3,450,000 shares of
    our common stock, $6.4 million on the tax benefit of
    options and $6.3 million from the proceeds of warrant and
    option exercises for 1,851,377 shares of our common stock.
    The proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $54.0 million, repay $6.4 million in net borrowings
    under our revolving lines of credit, repay related party debt of
    $3.0 million and to pay $9.9 million in debt issuance
    costs.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, financing
    activities provided a net of $44.1 million in cash. We
    received $56.3 million in borrowings under long-term debt
    facilities, $15.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance
    of 1,761,034 shares of our common stock, $2.5 million
    in net borrowings under our revolving lines of credit and
    $1.4 million from the proceeds of warrant and option
    exercises for 1,076,154 shares of our common stock. The
    proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $28.2 million, repay related party debt of
    $1.5 million and to pay $1.8 million in debt issuance
    costs.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2004, financing
    activities provided a net of $11.8 million in cash. We
    received $16.9 million in net proceeds from the issuance of
    6,081,301 shares of our common stock, $8.2 million in
    borrowings under long-term debt facilities and a $689,000
    increase in net borrowings under our revolving lines of credit.
    The proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $13.5 million and to pay $391,000 in debt issuance costs.

 

    On January 18, 2006 and August 14, 2006, we closed on
    private offerings, to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to
    Rule 144A under the Securities Act, of $160.0 million
    and $95.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior
    notes, respectively. The senior notes are due January 15,
    2014 and bear interest at 9.0%. The proceeds were used to fund
    the acquisitions of Specialty and DLS, to repay existing debt
    and for general corporate purposes. Debt repaid included all
    outstanding balances under our credit agreement, including a
    $42.1 million term loan and $6.4 million in working
    capital advances, a $4.0 million subordinated note issued
    in connection with acquisition of AirComp, approximately
    $3.0 million subordinated note issued in connection with
    the acquisition of Tubular, approximately $548,000 on a real
    estate loan and approximately $350,000 on outstanding equipment
    financing.

 

    On January 18, 2006, we also executed an amended and
    restated credit agreement which provides for a
    $25.0 million revolving line of credit with a maturity of
    January 2010. This agreement contains customary events of
    default and financial covenants and limits our ability to incur
    additional indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay
    dividends or make other distributions, create liens and sell
    assets. Our obligations under the



    42



Table of Contents


    agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets
    excluding the DLS assets, but including 2/3 of our shares of
    DLS. At December 31, 2006, no amounts were borrowed on the
    facility but availability is reduced by outstanding letters of
    credit of $9.7 million.

 

    As part of our acquisition of DLS, we assumed various bank loans
    with floating interest rates based on LIBOR plus a margin and
    terms ranging from 2 to 5 years. The weighted average
    margin was 7.0% at December 31, 2006. These bank loans are
    denominated in U.S. dollars and the outstanding amount due
    as of December 31, 2006 was $7.3 million.

 

    On December 18, 2006, we closed on the OGR acquisition with
    the proceeds from a $300.0 million unsecured bridge
    financing. The bridge loan had a term of 18 months.
    Tranche A of the bridge was for $225.0 million and
    bore interest at LIBOR plus 3.75%, and Tranche B was for
    $75.0 million and bore interest at LIBOR plus 5.75% The
    bridge was repaid on January 29, 2007 from the proceeds of
    a private offering of $250.0 million aggregate principal
    amount of 8.5% senior notes due 2017 and the proceeds from an
    offering of 6.0 million shares of our common stock.

 

    In connection with the acquisition of Rogers, we issued to the
    seller a note in the amount of $750,000. The note bears interest
    at 5.0% and is due April 3, 2009.

 

    As part of the acquisition of Mountain Air in 2001, we issued a
    note to the sellers of Mountain Air in the original amount of
    $2.2 million accruing interest at a rate of 5.75% per
    annum. The note was reduced to $1.5 million as a result of
    the settlement of a legal action against the sellers in 2003. In
    March 2005, we reached an agreement with the sellers and holders
    of the note as a result of an action brought against us by the
    sellers. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid the holders
    of the note $1.0 million in cash, and agreed to pay an
    additional $350,000 on June 1, 2006, and an additional
    $150,000 on June 1, 2007, in settlement of all claims. At
    December 31, 2006 the outstanding amounts due were $150,000.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Safco, we agreed to pay a
    total of $150,000 to the sellers in exchange for a non-compete
    agreement. We are required to make annual payments of $50,000
    through September 30, 2007. In connection with the purchase
    of Capcoil, we agreed to pay a total of $500,000 to two
    management employees in exchange for non-compete agreements. We
    are required to make annual payments of $110,000 through May
    2008. Total amounts due under theses non-compete agreements at
    December 31, 2006 was $270,000.

 

    In 2000 we compensated directors, including current directors
    Nederlander and Toboroff, who served on the board of directors
    from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation, by
    issuing promissory notes totaling $325,000. The notes bore
    interest at the rate of 5.0%. At December 31, 2006, the
    principal and accrued interest on these notes totaled
    approximately $32,000.

 

    We have various equipment financing loans with interest rates
    ranging from 5.0% to 8.7% and terms ranging from 2 to
    5 years. As of December 31, 2006, the outstanding
    balances for equipment financing loans were $3.5 million.
    We also have various capital leases with terms that expire in
    2008. As of December 31, 2006, amounts outstanding under
    capital leases were approximately $414,000.

 

    In April 2006 and August 2006, we obtained insurance premium
    financings in the amount of $1.9 million and $896,000 with
    fixed interest rates of 5.6% and 6.0%, respectively Under terms
    of the agreements, amounts outstanding are paid over
    10 month and 11 month repayment schedules. The
    outstanding balances of these notes was approximately
    $1.0 million as of December 31, 2006.



    43



Table of Contents

 

    The following table summarizes our obligations and commitments
    to make future payments under our notes payable, operating
    leases, employment contracts and consulting agreements for the
    periods specified as of December 31, 2006.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Payments by Period


 




 


 


 


 


 


Less Than



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Total


 


 


1 Year


 


 


2-3 Years


 


 


4-5 Years


 


 


After 5 Years


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Contractual
    Obligations



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Notes payable(a)
    



 


    $


    518,032


 


 


    $


    6,586


 


 


    $


    4,646


 


 


    $


    1,800


 


 


    $


    505,000


 





Capital leases(b)
    



 


 


    413


 


 


 


    413


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Interest payments on notes
    payable(a)
    



 


 


    379,759


 


 


 


    45,797


 


 


 


    88,858


 


 


 


    88,456


 


 


 


    156,648


 





Operating leases
    



 


 


    5,418


 


 


 


    2,013


 


 


 


    2,658


 


 


 


    277


 


 


 


    470


 





Employment contracts
    



 


 


    5,394


 


 


 


    3,064


 


 


 


    2,330


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total contractual cash obligations
    



 


    $


    909,016


 


 


    $


    57,873


 


 


    $


    98,492


 


 


    $


    90,533


 


 


    $


    662,118


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

 








    (a) 


    Includes obligations on our $255 million 8.5% senior
    notes closed in January 2007. The proceeds from the
    8.5% senior notes and our January 2007 common stock
    offering were used to repay the $300 million bridge loan
    facility that was outstanding at December 31, 2006.

 


    (b) 


    These amounts represent our minimum capital lease payments, net
    of interest payments totaling $15,000.


 

    We have identified capital expenditure projects that will
    require up to approximately $80.0 million in 2007,
    exclusive of any acquisitions. We believe that our cash
    generated from operations, cash on hand and cash available under
    our credit facilities will provide sufficient funds for our
    identified projects.

 

    We intend to implement a growth strategy of increasing the scope
    of services through both internal growth and acquisitions. We
    are regularly involved in discussions with a number of potential
    acquisition candidates. We expect to make capital expenditures
    to acquire and to maintain our existing equipment. Our
    performance and cash flow from operations will be determined by
    the demand for our services which in turn are affected by our
    customers’ expenditures for oil and natural gas exploration
    and development and industry perceptions and expectations of
    future oil and natural gas prices in the areas where we operate.
    We will need to refinance our existing debt facilities as they
    become due and provide funds for capital expenditures and
    acquisitions. To effect our expansion plans, we will require
    additional equity or debt financing in excess of our current
    working capital and amounts available under credit facilities.
    There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising
    the additional debt or equity capital or that we can do so on
    terms that will be acceptable to us.

 

Recent
    Developments

 

    In January 2007, we closed on a private offering, to qualified
    institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the
    Securities Act, of $255.0 million principal amount of our
    8.5% senior notes due 2017. The proceeds of the senior
    notes offering, together with a portion of the proceeds of our
    concurrent common stock offering, were used to repay the debt
    outstanding under our $300 million bridge loan facility,
    which we incurred to finance our acquisition of substantially
    all the assets of OGR.

 

    In January 2007, we closed on a public offering of
    6.0 million shares of our common stock at $17.65 per
    share. The proceeds of the common stock offering, together with
    the proceeds of our concurrent senior notes offering, were used
    to repay the debt outstanding under our $300 million bridge
    loan facility, which we incurred to finance our acquisition of
    substantially all the assets of OGR and for general corporate
    purposes.

 

    On February 7, 2007, Zane Tankel was elected as a member of
    our Board of Directors.

 

Critical
    Accounting Policies

 

    We have identified the policies below as critical to our
    business operations and the understanding of our results of
    operations. The impact and any associated risks related to these
    policies on our business operations



    44



Table of Contents


    is discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and
    Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations where
    such policies affect our reported and expected financial
    results. For a detailed discussion on the application of these
    and other accounting policies, see Note 1 in the Notes to
    the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this
    document. Our preparation of this report requires us to make
    estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of
    assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and
    liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the
    reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting
    period. There can be no assurance that actual results will not
    differ from those estimates.

 

Allowance For Doubtful Accounts.  The
    determination of the collectibility of amounts due from our
    customers requires us to use estimates and make judgments
    regarding future events and trends, including monitoring our
    customer payment history and current credit worthiness to
    determine that collectibility is reasonably assured, as well as
    consideration of the overall business climate in which our
    customers operate. Those uncertainties require us to make
    frequent judgments and estimates regarding our customers’
    ability to pay amounts due us in order to determine the
    appropriate amount of valuation allowances required for doubtful
    accounts. Provisions for doubtful accounts are recorded when it
    becomes evident that the customers will not be able to make the
    required payments at either contractual due dates or in the
    future.

 

Revenue Recognition.  We provide rental
    equipment and drilling services to our customers at per day and
    per job contractual rates and recognize the drilling related
    revenue as the work progresses and when collectibility is
    reasonably assured. The Securities and Exchange
    Commission’s Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104,
    Revenue Recognition in Financial Statements, provides
    guidance on the SEC staff’s views on application of
    generally accepted accounting principles to selected revenue
    recognition issues. Our revenue recognition policy is in
    accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
    SAB No. 104.

 

Impairment Of Long-Lived Assets.  Long-lived
    assets, which include property, plant and equipment, goodwill
    and other intangibles, comprise a significant amount of our
    total assets. We make judgments and estimates in conjunction
    with the carrying value of these assets, including amounts to be
    capitalized, depreciation and amortization methods and useful
    lives. Additionally, the carrying values of these assets are
    reviewed for impairment or whenever events or changes in
    circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be
    recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded in the period in
    which it is determined that the carrying amount is not
    recoverable. This requires us to make long-term forecasts of our
    future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to
    review. These forecasts require assumptions about demand for our
    products and services, future market conditions and
    technological developments. Significant and unanticipated
    changes to these assumptions could require a provision for
    impairment in a future period.

 

Goodwill And Other Intangibles.  As of
    December 31, 2006, we have recorded approximately
    $125.8 million of goodwill and $32.8 million of other
    identifiable intangible assets. We perform purchase price
    allocations to intangible assets when we make a business
    combination. Business combinations and purchase price
    allocations have been consummated for acquisitions in all of our
    reportable segments. The excess of the purchase price after
    allocation of fair values to tangible assets is allocated to
    identifiable intangibles and thereafter to goodwill.
    Subsequently, we perform our initial impairment tests and annual
    impairment tests in accordance with Financial Accounting
    Standards Board No. 141, Business Combinations, and
    Financial Accounting Standards Board No. 142, Goodwill
    and Other Intangible Assets. These initial valuations used
    two approaches to determine the carrying amount of the
    individual reporting units. The first approach is the Discounted
    Cash Flow Method, which focuses on our expected cash flow. In
    applying this approach, the cash flow available for distribution
    is projected for a finite period of years. Cash flow available
    for distribution is defined as the amount of cash that could be
    distributed as a dividend without impairing our future
    profitability or operations. The cash flow available for
    distribution and the terminal value (our value at the end of the
    estimation period) are then discounted to present value to
    derive an indication of value of the business enterprise. This
    valuation method is dependent upon the assumptions made
    regarding future cash flow and cash requirements. The second
    approach is the Guideline Company Method which focuses on
    comparing us to selected reasonably similar publicly traded
    companies. Under this method, valuation multiples are:
    (i) derived from operating data of selected similar
    companies; (ii) evaluated and adjusted based on our
    strengths and weaknesses relative to the selected guideline
    companies; and (iii) applied to our operating data to
    arrive at an indication of value. This valuation method is
    dependent upon the assumption that our value can be evaluated by
    analysis of our earnings and our strengths and weaknesses
    relative to the selected similar companies.



    45



Table of Contents


    Significant and unanticipated changes to these assumptions could
    require a provision for impairment in a future period.

 

Income Taxes.  The determination and evaluation
    of our annual income tax provision involves the interpretation
    of tax laws in various jurisdictions in which we operate and
    requires significant judgment and the use of estimates and
    assumptions regarding significant future events such as the
    amount, timing and character of income, deductions and tax
    credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations and our level of
    operations or profitability in each jurisdiction may impact our
    tax liability in any given year. While our annual tax provision
    is based on the information available to us at the time, a
    number of years may elapse before the ultimate tax liabilities
    in certain tax jurisdictions are determined. Current income tax
    expense reflects an estimate of our income tax liability for the
    current year, withholding taxes, changes in tax rates and
    changes in prior year tax estimates as returns are filed.
    Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the
    anticipated future tax effects of temporary differences between
    the financial statement basis and the tax basis of our assets
    and liabilities using the enacted tax rates in effect at year
    end. A valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is recorded
    when it is more-likely-than-not that the benefit from the
    deferred tax asset will not be realized.

 

    It is our intention to permanently reinvest all of the
    undistributed earnings of our non-U.S. subsidiaries in such
    subsidiaries. Accordingly, we have not provided for U.S.
    deferred taxes on the undistributed earnings of our non-U.S.
    subsidiaries. If a distribution is made to us from the
    undistributed earnings of these subsidiaries, we could be
    required to record additional taxes. Because we cannot predict
    when, if at all, we will make a distribution of these
    undistributed earnings, we are unable to make a determination of
    the amount of unrecognized deferred tax liability.

 

Recently
    Issued Accounting Standards

 

    In February 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 155,
    Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial
    Instruments.  SFAS No. 155 provides
    entities with relief from having to separately determine the
    fair value of an embedded derivative that would otherwise be
    required to be bifurcated from its host contract in accordance
    with SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative
    Instruments and Hedging Activities. SFAS No. 155
    allows an entity to make an irrevocable election to measure such
    a hybrid financial instrument at fair value in its entirely,
    with changes in fair value recognized in earning.
    SFAS No. 155 is effective for all financial
    instruments acquired , issued or subject to a remeasurement
    event occurring after the beginning of an entity’s first
    fiscal year that begins after September 15, 2006. We
    believe that the adoption of SFAS No. 155 will not
    have a material impact on our financial position, results of
    operations or cash flows.

 

    In March 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 156,
    Accounting for Servicing of Financial
    Assets — An Amendment to FASB Statement
    No. 140. SFAS No. 156 requires entities to
    recognize a servicing asset or liability each time they
    undertake an obligation to service a financial asset by entering
    into a servicing contract in certain situations. This statement
    also requires all separately recognized servicing assets and
    servicing liabilities to be initially measured at fair value and
    permits a choice of either the amortization or fair value
    measurement method for subsequent measurement. The effective
    date of this statement is for annual periods beginning after
    September 15, 2006, with earlier adoption permitted as of
    the beginning of an entity’s fiscal year provided the
    entity has not issued any financial statements for that year. We
    do not plan to adopt SFAS No. 156 early, and we are
    currently assessing the impact on our Consolidated Financial
    Statements.

 

    In July 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation, FIN,
    No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
    Taxes —  An Interpretation of FASB Statement
    No. 109. FIN No. 48 clarifies the accounting
    for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an
    enterprise’s financial statements in accordance with
    SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. It
    prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for
    the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax
    position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. This new
    standard also provides guidance on derecognition,
    classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim
    periods, disclosure and transition. The provisions of
    FIN No. 48 are to be applied to all tax positions upon
    initial adoption of this standard. Only tax positions that meet
    the more
    likely-than-not
    recognition threshold at the effective date may be recognized or
    continue to be recognized upon adoption of FIN No. 48.
    The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of
    FIN No. 48 should be reported as an adjustment to the
    opening balance of



    46



Table of Contents


    retaining earnings (or other appropriate components of equity or
    net assets in the statement of financial position) for that
    fiscal year. The provisions of FIN No. 48 are
    effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15,
    2006. We are currently evaluating the impact of applying the
    provisions of FIN No. 48.

 

    In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair
    Value Measurements. SFAS No. 157 clarifies the
    principle that fair value should be based on the assumptions
    that market participants would use when pricing an asset or
    liability and establishes a fair value hierarchy that
    prioritizes the information used to develop those assumptions.
    Under the standard, fair value measurements would be separately
    disclosed by level within the fair value hierarchy.
    SFAS No. 157 is effective for financial statements
    issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007,
    and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early
    adoption permitted. We believe that the adoption of
    SFAS No. 157 will not have a material impact on our
    financial position, results of operations or cash flows.

 

    In September 2006, the FASB issued FSP No. AUG AIR-1,
    Accounting for Planned Major Maintenance Activities. FSP
    No. AUG AIR-1 prohibits the use of the
    accrued-in-advance
    method for accounting for major maintenance activities and
    confirms the acceptable methods of accounting for planned major
    maintenance activities. FSP No. AUG AIR-1 is effective the
    first fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2006. We
    believe that the adoption of FSP No. AUG AIR-1 will not
    have a material impact on our financial position, results of
    operations or cash flows.

 

    In September 2006, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued
    Staff Accounting Bulletin 108, Considering the Effects
    of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in
    Current Year Financial Statements
    (“SAB 108”). SAB 108 requires that
    public companies utilize a “dual-approach” to
    assessing the quantitative effects of financial misstatements.
    This dual approach includes both an income statement focused
    assessment and a balance sheet focused assessment. SAB 108
    is effective for fiscal years ending after November 15,
    2006. We adopted SAB 108 on December 31, 2006, and
    there was no impact on our consolidated financial statements.

 

Off-Balance
    Sheet Arrangements

 

    We have no off balance sheet arrangements, other than normal
    operating leases and employee contracts, that have or are likely
    to have a current or future material effect on our financial
    condition, changes in financial condition, revenues, expenses,
    results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or
    capital resources. We have a $25.0 million revolving line
    of credit with a maturity of January 2010. At December 31,
    2006, no amounts were borrowed on the facility but availability
    is reduced by outstanding letters of credit of
    $9.7 million. We do not guarantee obligations of any
    unconsolidated entities.


 







ITEM 7A.  


QUANTITATIVE
    AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK.




 

    We are exposed to market risk primarily from changes in interest
    rates and foreign currency exchange risks.

 

Interest
    Rate Risk

 

    Fluctuations in the general level of interest rates on our
    current and future fixed and variable rate debt obligations
    expose us to market risk. We are vulnerable to significant
    fluctuations in interest rates on our variable rate debt and on
    any future refinancing of our fixed rate debt and on future debt.

 

    At December 31, 2006, we were exposed to interest rate
    fluctuations on approximately $8.1 million of bank loans
    carrying variable interest rates. A hypothetical one hundred
    basis point increase in interest rates for these notes payable
    would increase our annual interest expense by approximately
    $81,000. Due to the uncertainty of fluctuations in interest
    rates and the specific actions that might be taken by us to
    mitigate the impact of such fluctuations and their possible
    effects, the foregoing sensitivity analysis assumes no changes
    in our financial structure.

 

    We have also been subject to interest rate market risk for
    short-term invested cash and cash equivalents. The principal of
    such invested funds would not be subject to fluctuating value
    because of their highly liquid short-term nature. As of
    December 31, 2006, we had $28.3 million invested in
    short-term maturing investments.



    47



Table of Contents

 

Foreign
    Currency Exchange Rate Risk

 

    We have designated the U.S. dollar as the functional
    currency for our operations in international locations as we
    contract with customers, purchase equipment and finance capital
    using the U.S. dollar. Local currency transaction gains and
    losses, arising from remeasurement of certain assets and
    liabilities denominated in local currency, are included in our
    consolidated statements of income. For the year ended
    December 31, 2006, we had a net foreign exchange loss of
    $515,000 relating to our DLS operations. We conduct business in
    Mexico through our Mexican partner, Matyep. This business
    exposes us to foreign exchange risk. To control this risk, we
    provide for payment in U.S. dollars.


 







ITEM 8.  


FINANCIAL
    STATEMENTS.




 

INDEX TO
    FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

 



  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Page



 





Management’s
    Report to the Stockholders of Allis-Chalmers Energy
    Inc. 
    



 




49
    







Reports of
    Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm



 




50
    







Consolidated
    Balance Sheet



 




52
    







Consolidated
    Statement of Operations



 




53
    







Consolidated
    Statement of Stockholders’ Equity



 




54
    







Consolidated
    Statement of Cash Flows



 




55
    







Notes to
    Consolidated Financial Statements



 




56
    







Supplemental Information to
    Consolidated Financial Statements — Summarized
    Quarterly Financial Data
    



 




91
    









    48



Table of Contents


 

MANAGEMENT’S
    REPORT TO THE STOCKHOLDERS OF ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY
    INC.


 

Management’s
    Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting

 

    As management, we are responsible for establishing and
    maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting
    for Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and its subsidiaries, or
    Allis-Chalmers. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of
    internal control over financial reporting, as required by
    Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, we have
    conducted an assessment, including testing, using the criteria
    in Internal Control-Integral Framework issued by the
    Committee of Sponsoring Organization of the Treadway Commission
    (COSO). Allis-Chalmers’ system of internal control over
    financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance
    regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
    preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
    accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
    United States of America. Because of its inherent limitation,
    internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
    detect misstatements.

 

    Based on our assessment, we have concluded that Allis-Chalmers
    maintained effective internal control over financial reporting
    as of December 31, 2006, based on criteria in Internal
    Control-Integrated Framework issued by the COSO. Our
    assessment of the effectiveness of Allis-Chalmers internal
    control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006
    has been audited by UHY LLP, an independent registered public
    accounting firm, as stated in their report, which is included
    herein.

 

Management’s
    Certifications

 

    The certifications of Allis-Chalmers’ Chief Executive
    Officer and Chief Financial Officer required by the
    Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 have been included as
    Exhibits 31 and 32 in Allis-Chalmers’
    Form 10-K.

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.
    

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




By:
    



 


/s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah




 


 


 


By:
    


 


/s/ Victor Perez






 


 


Munawar H. Hidayatallah
    


 


 


 


 


 


Victor Perez
    




 


 


Chief Executive Officer
    


 


 


 


 


 


Chief Financial Officer
    







    49



Table of Contents


 

REPORT OF
    INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM


 

    To the Board of Directors and Stockholders


    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


    Houston, Texas

 

    We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and subsidiaries (the
    “Company”) as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, and
    the related consolidated statements of operations,
    stockholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three
    years in the period ended December 31, 2006. These
    consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the
    Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an
    opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our
    audits.

 

    We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
    standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
    reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
    free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
    test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
    the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
    accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
    management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
    statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
    reasonable basis for our opinion.

 

    In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred
    to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
    consolidated financial position of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.
    and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, and the
    consolidated results of their operations and their cash flows
    for each of the three years in the period ended
    December 31, 2006, in conformity with accounting principles
    generally accepted in the United States of America.

 

    We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the
    effectiveness of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and
    subsidiaries’ internal control over financial reporting as
    of December 31, 2006, based on criteria established in
    Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
    Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
    (COSO), and our report dated March 15, 2007 expressed an
    unqualified opinion on management’s assessment of, and the
    effective operation of, internal control over financial
    reporting.

 

    As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial
    statements, effective January 1, 2006, the Company changed
    its method of accounting for stock-based compensation.

 
 



/s/  UHY
    LLP

 

    Houston, Texas


    March 15, 2007



    50



Table of Contents

 

REPORT OF
    INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM

 

    The Board of Directors and


    Stockholders of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.:

 

    We have audited management’s assessment, included in the
    accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over
    Financial Reporting appearing on Page 49, that
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and subsidiaries, or the Company,
    maintained effective internal control over financial reporting
    as of December 31, 2006, based on criteria established in
    Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the
    Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
    Commission. The Company’s management is responsible for
    maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting
    and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control
    over finance reporting. Our responsibility is to express an
    opinion on management’s assessment and an opinion on the
    effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over
    financial reporting based on our audit.

 

    We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting of Oversight Board (United States).
    Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
    obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal
    control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
    respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of
    internal control over financial reporting, evaluating
    management’s assessment, testing and evaluating the design
    and operating effectiveness of internal control, and performing
    such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
    circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable
    basis for our opinion.

 

    A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a
    process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
    reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
    financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
    generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s
    internal control over financial reporting includes those
    policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance
    of records that , in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
    reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
    company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
    are recorded as receipts and expenditures of the company are
    being made only in accordance with authorization of management
    and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable
    assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
    unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
    company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
    financial statements.

 

    Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
    financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
    Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
    periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
    inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
    of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

 

    In our opinion, management’s assessment that Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective internal
    control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006,
    is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on criteria
    established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework
    issued by Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
    Treadway Commission. Also, in our opinion, Allis-Chalmers Energy
    Inc. and subsidiaries maintained, in all material respects,
    effective internal control over financial reporting as of
    December 31, 2006, based on criteria established in
    Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by Committee
    of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.

 

    We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the
    consolidated balance sheets of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and
    subsidiaries as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, and the
    related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders
    equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period
    ended December 31, 2006, and our report dated
    March 15, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on those
    consolidated financial statements.

 



/s/  UHY
    LLP

 

    Houston, Texas


    March 15, 2007



    51



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    BALANCE SHEETS


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 




 


 


(In thousands, except



 




 


 


for share and per share amounts)


 



 





ASSETS






Cash and cash equivalents
    



 


    $


    39,745


 


 


    $


    1,920


 





Trade receivables, net of
    allowance for doubtful accounts of $826 and $383 at
    December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively
    



 


 


    95,766


 


 


 


    26,964


 





Inventories
    



 


 


    28,615


 


 


 


    5,945


 





Prepaid expenses and other
    



 


 


    16,636


 


 


 


    823


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current assets
    



 


 


    180,762


 


 


 


    35,652


 





Property and equipment, at costs
    net of accumulated depreciation of $29,743 and $9,996 at
    December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively
    



 


 


    554,258


 


 


 


    80,574


 





Goodwill
    



 


 


    125,835


 


 


 


    12,417


 





Other intangible assets, net of
    accumulated amortization of $4,475 and $3,163 at
    December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively
    



 


 


    32,840


 


 


 


    6,783


 





Debt issuance costs, net of
    accumulated amortization of $1,501 and $299 at December 31,
    2006 and 2005, respectively
    



 


 


    9,633


 


 


 


    1,298


 





Other assets
    



 


 


    4,998


 


 


 


    631


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total assets
    



 


    $


    908,326


 


 


    $


    137,355


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 





LIABILITIES AND
    STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY






Current maturities of long-term
    debt
    



 


    $


    6,999


 


 


    $


    5,632


 





Trade accounts payable
    



 


 


    25,666


 


 


 


    9,018


 





Accrued salaries, benefits and
    payroll taxes
    



 


 


    10,888


 


 


 


    1,271


 





Accrued interest
    



 


 


    11,867


 


 


 


    289


 





Accrued expenses
    



 


 


    16,951


 


 


 


    4,350


 





Accounts payable, related parties
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    60


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current liabilities
    



 


 


    72,371


 


 


 


    20,620


 





Deferred income tax liability
    



 


 


    19,953


 


 


 


    —


 





Long-term debt, net of current
    maturities
    



 


 


    561,446


 


 


 


    54,937


 





Other long-term liabilities
    



 


 


    623


 


 


 


    923


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities
    



 


 


    654,393


 


 


 


    76,480


 





Commitments and Contingencies
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Stockholders’ Equity
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Preferred stock, $0.01 par
    value (25,000,000 shares authorized, none issued)
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Common stock, $0.01 par value
    (100,000,000 shares authorized; 28,233,411 issued and
    outstanding at December 31, 2006 and 16,859,988 issued and
    outstanding at December 31, 2005)
    



 


 


    282


 


 


 


    169


 





Capital in excess of par value
    



 


 


    216,208


 


 


 


    58,889


 





Retained earnings
    



 


 


    37,443


 


 


 


    1,817


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total stockholders’ equity
    



 


 


    253,933


 


 


 


    60,875


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities and
    stockholders’ equity
    



 


    $


    908,326


 


 


    $


    137,355


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    52



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 




 


 


(In thousands, except per



 




 


 


share amounts)


 



 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    307,304


 


 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 





Cost of revenues
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Direct costs
    



 


 


    181,919


 


 


 


    69,889


 


 


 


    32,598


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    20,261


 


 


 


    4,874


 


 


 


    2,702


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Gross margin
    



 


 


    105,124


 


 


 


    30,581


 


 


 


    12,426


 





General and administrative expense
    



 


 


    35,536


 


 


 


    15,576


 


 


 


    7,323


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    2,932


 


 


 


    1,787


 


 


 


    876


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income from operations
    



 


 


    66,656


 


 


 


    13,218


 


 


 


    4,227


 





Other income (expense):
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Interest expense
    



 


 


    (20,235


    )


 


 


    (4,446


    )


 


 


    (2,808


    )





Interest income
    



 


 


    972


 


 


 


    49


 


 


 


    32


 





Other
    



 


 


    (347


    )


 


 


    186


 


 


 


    272


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total other income (expense)
    



 


 


    (19,610


    )


 


 


    (4,211


    )


 


 


    (2,504


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income before minority interest
    and income taxes
    



 


 


    47,046


 


 


 


    9,007


 


 


 


    1,723


 





Minority interest in income of
    subsidiaries
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (488


    )


 


 


    (321


    )





Provision for income taxes
    



 


 


    (11,420


    )


 


 


    (1,344


    )


 


 


    (514


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


 


    35,626


 


 


 


    7,175


 


 


 


    888


 





Preferred stock dividend
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (124


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income attributed to common
    stockholders
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common
    share — basic
    



 


    $


    1.73


 


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    1.66


 


 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    20,548


 


 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    21,410


 


 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    53



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Capital in



 


 


Retained



 


 


 


 




 


 


Common Stock


 


 


Excess of



 


 


Earnings



 


 


 


 




 


 


Shares


 


 


Amount


 


 


Par Value


 


 


(Deficit)


 


 


Total


 




 


 


(In thousands, except share amounts)


 



 





Balances, December 31, 2003,
    as restated
    



 


 


    3,926,668


 


 


 


    39


 


 


 


    10,748


 


 


 


    (6,246


    )


 


 


    4,541


 





Net income
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    888


 


 


 


    888


 





Issuance of common stock:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions
    



 


 


    1,868,466


 


 


 


    19


 


 


 


    8,592


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,611


 





Private placement
    



 


 


    6,081,301


 


 


 


    61


 


 


 


    15,600


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,661


 





Services
    



 


 


    17,000


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    99


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    99


 





Conversion of preferred stock
    



 


 


    1,718,090


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    4,278


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,295


 





Issuance of stock purchase warrants
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,138


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,138


 





Accrual of preferred dividends
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (124


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (124


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Balances, December 31, 2004
    



 


 


    13,611,525


 


 


 


    136


 


 


 


    40,331


 


 


 


    (5,358


    )


 


 


    35,109


 





Net income
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    7,175


 


 


 


    7,175


 





Issuance of common stock:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions
    



 


 


    411,275


 


 


 


    4


 


 


 


    1,746


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,750


 





Secondary public offering, net of
    offering costs
    



 


 


    1,761,034


 


 


 


    18


 


 


 


    15,441


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,459


 





Stock options and warrants
    exercised
    



 


 


    1,076,154


 


 


 


    11


 


 


 


    1,371


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,382


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Balances, December 31, 2005
    



 


 


    16,859,988


 


 


 


    169


 


 


 


    58,889


 


 


 


    1,817


 


 


 


    60,875


 





Net income
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    35,626


 


 


 


    35,626


 





Issuance of common stock:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions
    



 


 


    6,072,046


 


 


 


    61


 


 


 


    94,919


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    94,980


 





Secondary public offering, net of
    offering costs
    



 


 


    3,450,000


 


 


 


    34


 


 


 


    46,263


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    46,297


 





Stock options and warrants
    exercised
    



 


 


    1,851,377


 


 


 


    18


 


 


 


    6,303


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,321


 





Stock based compensation
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,394


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,394


 





Tax benefits on stock plans
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,440


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,440


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Balances, December 31, 2006
    



 


 


    28,233,411


 


 


    $


    282


 


 


    $


    216,208


 


 


    $


    37,443


 


 


    $


    253,933


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    54



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Cash Flows from Operating
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 





Adjustments to reconcile net
    income to net cash provided by operating activities:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    20,261


 


 


 


    4,874


 


 


 


    2,702


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    2,932


 


 


 


    1,787


 


 


 


    876


 





Write-off of deferred financing
    fees due to refinancing
    



 


 


    453


 


 


 


    653


 


 


 


    —


 





Issuance of stock options for
    services
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    14


 





Stock based compensation
    



 


 


    3,394


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Provision for bad debts
    



 


 


    781


 


 


 


    219


 


 


 


    104


 





Amortization of discount on debt
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    9


 


 


 


    350


 





Imputed interest
    



 


 


    355


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Deferred taxes
    



 


 


    2,215


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Minority interest in income of
    subsidiaries
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    488


 


 


 


    321


 





(Gain) on sale of property
    



 


 


    (2,444


    )


 


 


    (669


    )


 


 


    —


 





Changes in working capital:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





(Increase) in accounts receivable
    



 


 


    (23,175


    )


 


 


    (10,656


    )


 


 


    (2,396


    )





(Increase) in due from related
    party
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (7


    )





(Increase) in other current assets
    



 


 


    (132


    )


 


 


    (2,143


    )


 


 


    (612


    )





Decrease (increase) in other assets
    



 


 


    308


 


 


 


    (936


    )


 


 


    (19


    )





(Decrease) increase in accounts
    payable
    



 


 


    (2,337


    )


 


 


    2,373


 


 


 


    1,140


 





Increase in accrued interest
    



 


 


    11,382


 


 


 


    324


 


 


 


    299


 





Increase (Decrease) in accrued
    expenses
    



 


 


    872


 


 


 


    (97


    )


 


 


    (276


    )





(Decrease) in other liabilities
    



 


 


    (224


    )


 


 


    (266


    )


 


 


    (141


    )





Increase in accrued salaries,
    benefits and payroll taxes
    



 


 


    3,392


 


 


 


    443


 


 


 


    19


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided by operating
    activities
    



 


 


    53,659


 


 


 


    3,578


 


 


 


    3,262


 





Cash Flows from Investing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
    



 


 


    (526,572


    )


 


 


    (36,888


    )


 


 


    (4,459


    )





Purchase of property and equipment
    



 


 


    (39,697


    )


 


 


    (17,767


    )


 


 


    (4,603


    )





Proceeds from sale of property and
    equipment
    



 


 


    6,881


 


 


 


    1,579


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash used in investing
    activities
    



 


 


    (559,388


    )


 


 


    (53,076


    )


 


 


    (9,062


    )





Cash Flows from Financing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Proceeds from issuance of
    long-term debt
    



 


 


    557,820


 


 


 


    56,251


 


 


 


    8,169


 





Payments on long-term debt
    



 


 


    (54,030


    )


 


 


    (28,202


    )


 


 


    (13,259


    )





Payments on related party debt
    



 


 


    (3,031


    )


 


 


    (1,522


    )


 


 


    (246


    )





Net (repayments) borrowings on
    lines of credit
    



 


 


    (6,400


    )


 


 


    2,527


 


 


 


    689


 





Proceeds from issuance of common
    stock, net of offering costs
    



 


 


    46,297


 


 


 


    15,459


 


 


 


    16,883


 





Proceeds from exercise of options
    and warrants
    



 


 


    6,321


 


 


 


    1,382


 


 


 


    —


 





Tax benefit on options
    



 


 


    6,440


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Debt issuance costs
    



 


 


    (9,863


    )


 


 


    (1,821


    )


 


 


    (391


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided by financing
    activities
    



 


 


    543,554


 


 


 


    44,074


 


 


 


    11,845


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net increase (decrease) in cash
    and cash equivalents
    



 


 


    37,825


 


 


 


(5,424


    )


 


 


    6,045


 





Cash and cash equivalents at
    beginning of year
    



 


 


    1,920


 


 


 


    7,344


 


 


 


    1,299


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash and cash equivalents at end
    of year
    



 


    $


    39,745


 


 


    $


    1,920


 


 


    $


    7,344


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    55



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements


 

NOTE 1 —
    NATURE OF BUSINESS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING
    POLICIES

 

Organization
    of Business

 

    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. (“Allis-Chalmers”,
    “we”, “our” or “us”) was
    incorporated in Delaware in 1913. We are a multi-faceted
    oilfield services company that provides services and equipment
    to oil and natural gas exploration and production companies,
    domestically in Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado,
    Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah, Wyoming, Arkansas, Alabama, West
    Virginia, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico, and internationally,
    primarily in Argentina and Mexico. We operate in six sectors of
    the oil and natural gas service industry: rental tools,
    international drilling, directional drilling services; casing
    and tubing services; compressed air drilling services; and
    production services.

 

    The nature of our operations and the many regions in which we
    operate subject us to changing economic, regulatory and
    political conditions. We are vulnerable to near-term and
    long-term changes in the demand for and prices of oil and
    natural gas and the related demand for oilfield service
    operations.

 

Use of
    Estimates

 

    The preparation of financial statements in conformity with
    accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
    America requires management to make estimates and assumptions
    that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
    disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
    the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues
    and expenses during the reporting period. Future events and
    their effects cannot be perceived with certainty. Accordingly,
    our accounting estimates require the exercise of judgment. While
    management believes that the estimates and assumptions used in
    the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are
    appropriate, actual results could differ from those estimates.
    Estimates are used for, but are not limited to, determining the
    following: allowance for doubtful accounts, recoverability of
    long-lived assets and intangibles, useful lives used in
    depreciation and amortization, income taxes and valuation
    allowances. The accounting estimates used in the preparation of
    the consolidated financial statements may change as new events
    occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information
    is obtained and as our operating environment changes.

 

Principles
    of Consolidation

 

    The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
    Allis-Chalmers and its subsidiaries. Our subsidiaries at
    December 31, 2006 are Oil Quip Rentals, Inc. (“Oil
    Quip”), Mountain Compressed Air Inc. (“Mountain
    Air”), Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services Inc.
    (“Tubular”), Strata Directional Technology, Inc.
    (“Strata”), AirComp LLC (“AirComp”),
    Allis-Chalmers Rental Services, Inc. (“Rental”),
    Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc.
    (“Production”), Allis-Chalmers Management LP,
    Drilling, Logistics & Services Corporation
    (“DLS”) and Petro-Rentals, Incorporated
    (“Petro-Rental”). All significant inter-company
    transactions have been eliminated.

 

Revenue
    Recognition

 

    We provide rental equipment and drilling services to our
    customers at per day and per job contractual rates and recognize
    the drilling related revenue as the work progresses and when
    collectibility is reasonably assured. Payments from customers
    for the cost of oilfield rental equipment that is damaged or
    lost-in-hole are reflected as revenues. We recognized revenue
    from damaged or lost-in-hole equipment of $2.4 million,
    $970,000 and $41,000 for the year ended December 31, 2006,
    2005 and 2004, respectively. The Securities and Exchange
    Commission’s (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB)
    No. 104, Revenue Recognition In Financial Statements
    (“SAB No. 104”), provides guidance on
    the SEC staff’s views on the application of generally
    accepted accounting principles to selected revenue recognition
    issues. Our revenue recognition policy is in accordance with
    generally accepted accounting principles and
    SAB No. 104.



    56



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

Allowance
    for Doubtful Accounts

 

    Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal
    trade terms. We sell our services to oil and natural gas
    exploration and production companies. We perform continuing
    credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition
    and although we generally do not require collateral, letters of
    credit may be required from customers in certain circumstances.

 

    The allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of
    the amount of probable credit losses existing in our accounts
    receivable. Significant individual accounts receivable balances
    which have been outstanding greater than 90 days are
    reviewed individually for collectibility We have a limited
    number of customers with individually large amounts due at any
    given date. Any unanticipated change in any one of these
    customer’s credit worthiness or other matters affecting the
    collectibility of amounts due from such customers could have a
    material effect on the results of operations in the period in
    which such changes or events occur. After all attempts to
    collect a receivable have failed, the receivable is written off
    against the allowance. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, we
    had recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of $826,000 and
    $383,000 respectively. Bad debt expense was $781,000, $219,000
    and $104,000 for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005
    and 2004, respectively.

 

Cash
    Equivalents

 

    We consider all highly liquid investments with an original
    maturity of three months or less at the time of purchase to be
    cash equivalents.

 

Inventories

 

    Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is
    determined using the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”)
    method or the average cost method, which approximates FIFO, and
    includes the cost of materials, labor and manufacturing overhead.

 

Property
    and Equipment

 

    Property and equipment is recorded at cost less accumulated
    depreciation. Certain equipment held under capital leases are
    classified as equipment and the related obligations are recorded
    as liabilities.

 

    Maintenance and repairs, which do not improve or extend the life
    of the related assets, are charged to operations when incurred.
    Refurbishments and renewals are capitalized when the value of
    the equipment is enhanced for an extended period. When property
    and equipment are sold or otherwise disposed of, the asset
    account and related accumulated depreciation account are
    relieved, and any gain or loss is included in operations.

 

    The cost of property and equipment currently in service is
    depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related
    assets, which range from three to twenty years. Depreciation is
    computed on the straight-line method for financial reporting
    purposes. Capital leases are amortized using the straight-line
    method over the estimated useful lives of the assets and lease
    amortization is included in depreciation expense. Depreciation
    expense charged to operations was $20.3 million,
    $4.9 million and $2.7 million for the years ended
    December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.

 

Goodwill,
    Intangible Assets and Amortization

 

    Goodwill, including goodwill associated with equity method
    investments, and other intangible assets with infinite lives are
    not amortized, but tested for impairment annually or more
    frequently if circumstances indicate that impairment may exist.
    Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized either
    on a straight-



    57



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    line basis over the asset’s estimated useful life or on a
    basis that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits
    of the intangible assets are realized.

 

    The impairment test requires the allocation of goodwill and all
    other assets and liabilities to reporting units. If the fair
    value of the reporting unit is less than the book value
    (including goodwill) then goodwill is reduced to its implied
    fair value and the amount of the writedown is charged against
    earnings. We perform impairment tests on the carrying value of
    our goodwill on an annual basis as of December 31st for
    each of our reportable segments. As of December 31, 2006
    and 2005, no impairment was deemed necessary. Increases in
    estimated future costs or decreases in projected revenues could
    lead to an impairment of all or a portion of our goodwill in
    future period.

 

Impairment
    of Long-Lived Assets

 

    Long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment
    and other intangible assets, and certain other assets are
    reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
    circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be
    recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded in the period in
    which it is determined that the carrying amount is not
    recoverable. The determination of recoverability is made based
    upon the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, excluding
    interest expense. The impairment loss is determined by comparing
    the fair value, as determined by a discounted cash flow
    analysis, with the carrying value of the related assets.

 

Financial
    Instruments

 

    Financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents,
    accounts receivable and payable, and debt. The carrying value of
    cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable and payable
    approximate fair value due to their short-term nature. We
    believe the fair values and the carrying value of our debt would
    not be materially different due to the instruments’
    interest rates approximating market rates for similar borrowings
    at December 31, 2006 and 2005.

 

Concentration
    of Credit and Customer Risk

 

    Financial instruments that potentially subject us to
    concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash and
    cash equivalents and trade accounts receivable. As of
    December 31, 2006, we have approximately $2.0 million
    of cash and cash equivalents residing in Argentina. We transact
    our business with several financial institutions. However, the
    amount on deposit in six financial institutions exceeded the
    $100,000 federally insured limit at December 31, 2006 by a
    total of $10.5 million. Management believes that the
    financial institutions are financially sound and the risk of
    loss is minimal.

 

    We sell our services to major and independent domestic and
    international oil and natural gas companies. We perform ongoing
    credit valuations of our customers and provide allowances for
    probable credit losses where appropriate. In 2006, one of our
    customers, Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina, or Pan
    American Energy, represented 11.7% of our consolidated revenues.
    In 2005 none of our customers accounted for more than 10% of our
    consolidated revenues. In the year ended December 31, 2004,
    Materiales y Equipo Petroleo, or Matyep in Mexico represented
    10.8%, and Burlington Resources represented 10.1% of our
    consolidated revenues, respectively. Revenues from Matyep
    represented 8.3%, 94.5% and 98.0% of our international revenues
    in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Revenues from Pan American
    Energy represented 45.6% of our international revenues.

 

Debt
    Issuance Costs

 

    The costs related to the issuance of debt are capitalized and
    amortized to interest expense using the straight-line method,
    which approximates the interest method, over the maturity
    periods of the related debt.



    58



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

Income
    Taxes

 

    Our income tax expense is based on our income, statutory tax
    rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the
    various jurisdictions in which we operate. We provide for income
    taxes based on the tax laws and rates in effect in the countries
    in which operations are conducted and income is earned. Our
    income tax expense is expected to fluctuate from year to year as
    our operations are conducted in different taxing jurisdictions
    and the amount of pre-tax income fluctuates.

 

    The determination and evaluation of our annual income tax
    provision involves the interpretation of tax laws in various
    jurisdictions in which we operate and requires significant
    judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding
    significant future events such as the amount, timing and
    character of income, deductions and tax credits. Changes in tax
    laws, regulations and our level of operations or profitability
    in each jurisdiction may impact our tax liability in any given
    year. While our annual tax provision is based on the information
    available to us at the time, a number of years may elapse before
    the ultimate tax liabilities in certain tax jurisdictions are
    determined.

 

    Current income tax expense reflects an estimate of our income
    tax liability for the current year, withholding taxes, changes
    in tax rates and changes in prior year tax estimates as returns
    are filed. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized
    for the anticipated future tax effects of temporary differences
    between the financial statement basis and the tax basis of our
    assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates in effect at
    year end. A valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is
    recorded when it is more-likely-than-not that the benefit from
    the deferred tax asset will not be realized.

 

    It is our intention to permanently reinvest all of the
    undistributed earnings of our
    non-U.S. subsidiaries
    in such subsidiaries. Accordingly, we have not provided for
    U.S. deferred taxes on the undistributed earnings of our
    non-U.S. subsidiaries.
    If a distribution is made to us from the undistributed earnings
    of these subsidiaries, we could be required to record additional
    taxes. Because we cannot predict when, if at all, we will make a
    distribution of these undistributed earnings, we are unable to
    make a determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred tax
    liability.

 

Stock-Based
    Compensation

 

    We adopted SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payment
    (“SFAS No. 123R”), effective
    January 1, 2006. This statement requires all share-based
    payments to employees, including grants of employee stock
    options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on
    their grant-date fair values. Compensation cost for awards
    granted prior to, but not vested, as of January 1, 2006
    would be based on the grant date attributes originally used to
    value those awards for pro forma purposes under
    SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based
    Compensation (“SFAS No. 123”). We
    adopted SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective
    transition method, utilizing the Black-Scholes option pricing
    model for the calculation of the fair value of our employee
    stock options. Under the modified prospective method, we record
    compensation cost related to unvested stock awards as of
    December 31, 2005 by recognizing the unamortized grant date
    fair value of these awards over the remaining vesting periods of
    those awards with no change in historical reported earnings. We
    estimated forfeiture rates for 2006 based on our historical
    experience.

 

    The Black-Scholes model incorporates assumptions to value
    stock-based awards. The risk-free rate of interest is the
    related U.S. Treasury yield curve for periods within the
    expected term of the option at the time of grant. The dividend
    yield on our common stock is assumed to be zero as we have
    historically not paid dividends and have no current plans to do
    so in the future. The expected volatility is based on historical
    volatility of our common stock.

 

    Prior to January 1, 2006, we accounted for our stock-based
    compensation using Accounting Principle Board Opinion
    No. 25 (“APB No. 25”). Under APB
    No. 25, compensation expense is recognized for stock
    options with an exercise price that is less than the market
    price on the grant date of the option. For stock



    59



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    options with exercise prices at or above the market value of the
    stock on the grant date, we adopted the disclosure-only
    provisions of SFAS No. 123. We also adopted the
    disclosure-only provisions of SFAS No. 123 for the
    stock options granted to our employees and directors.
    Accordingly, no compensation cost was recognized under APB
    No. 25. Our net income for the year ended December 31,
    2006 includes approximately $3.4 million of compensation
    costs related to share-based payments. The tax benefit recorded
    in association with the share-based payments was
    $1.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2006. As
    of December 31, 2006 there is $1.3 million of
    unrecognized compensation expense related to non-vested stock
    based compensation grants.

 

    Had compensation expense for the options granted been recorded
    based on the fair value at the grant date for the options,
    consistent with the provisions of SFAS 123, our net
    income/(loss) and net income/(loss) per share for the years
    ended December 31, 2005 and 2004 would have been decreased
    to the pro forma amounts indicated below (in thousands, except
    per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


For the Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


 


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Net income attributed to common
    stockholders as reported:
    



 


 


 


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 





Less total stock based employee
    compensation expense determined under fair value based method
    for all awards net of tax related effects
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


    (4,284


    )


 


 


    (1,072


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Pro-forma net income (loss)
    attributed to common stockholders
    



 


 


 


 


 


    $


    2,891


 


 


    $


    (308


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income/(loss) per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    As reported


 


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 




 


 


 


    Pro forma


 


 


    $


    0.19


 


 


    $


    (0.04


    )





Diluted
    



 


 


    As reported


 


 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 




 


 


 


    Pro forma


 


 


    $


    0.18


 


 


    $


    (0.04


    )





 

    Options were granted in 2006, 2005 and 2004. See Note 12
    for further disclosures regarding stock options. The following
    assumptions were applied in determining the pro forma
    compensation costs:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


For the Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Expected dividend yield
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Expected price volatility
    



 


 


    72.28


    %


 


 


    84.28


    %


 


 


    89.76


    %





Risk-free interest rate
    



 


 


    5.1


    %


 


 


    5.6


    %


 


 


    7.00


    %





Expected life of options
    



 


 


    7 years


 


 


 


    7 years


 


 


 


    7 years


 





Weighted average fair value of
    options granted at market value
    



 


 


    $10.58


 


 


 


    $5.02


 


 


 


    $3.19


 





 

Segments
    of an Enterprise and Related Information

 

    We disclose the results of our segments in accordance with
    SFAS No. 131, Disclosures About Segments Of An
    Enterprise And Related Information
    (“SFAS No. 131”). We designate the
    internal organization that is used by management for allocating
    resources and assessing performance as the source of our
    reportable segments. SFAS No. 131 also requires
    disclosures about products and services, geographic areas and
    major customers Please see Note 16 for further disclosure
    of segment information in accordance with SFAS No. 131.



    60



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

Income
    Per Common Share

 

    We compute income per common share in accordance with the
    provisions of SFAS No. 128, Earnings Per Share
    (“SFAS No. 128”). SFAS No. 128
    requires companies with complex capital structures to present
    basic and diluted earnings per share. Basic earnings per share
    are computed on the basis of the weighted average number of
    shares of common stock outstanding during the period. For
    periods through April 12, 2004, preferred dividends are
    deducted from net income and have been considered in the
    calculation of income available to common stockholders in
    computing basic earnings per share. Diluted earnings per share
    is similar to basic earnings per share, but presents the
    dilutive effect on a per share basis of potential common shares
    (e.g., convertible preferred stock, stock options, etc.) as if
    they had been converted. Potential dilutive common shares that
    have an anti-dilutive effect (e.g., those that increase income
    per share) are excluded from diluted earnings per share.

 

    The components of basic and diluted earnings per share are as
    follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


For the Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Numerator:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income available for common
    stockholders
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 





Plus income impact of assumed
    conversions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Preferred stock dividends/interest
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    124


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income applicable to common
    stockholders plus assumed conversions
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Denominator:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Denominator for basic earnings per
    share — weighted average shares outstanding
    



 


 


    20,548


 


 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 





Effect of potentially dilutive
    common shares:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Convertible preferred stock and
    employee and director stock options
    



 


 


    862


 


 


 


    1,406


 


 


 


    1,580


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average shares
    outstanding and assumed conversions
    



 


 


    21,410


 


 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic earnings per share
    



 


    $


    1.73


 


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted earnings per share
    



 


    $


    1.66


 


 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Reclassification

 

    Certain prior period balances have been reclassified to conform
    to current year presentation.

 

New
    Accounting Pronouncements

 

    In February 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 155,
    Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial Instruments
    (“SFAS No. 155”). SFAS No. 155
    provides entities with relief from having to separately
    determine the fair value of an embedded derivative that would
    otherwise be required to be bifurcated from its host contract in
    accordance with SFAS No. 133, Accounting for
    Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.
    SFAS No. 155 allows an entity to make an irrevocable
    election to measure such a hybrid financial instrument at fair
    value in its entirely, with changes in fair value recognized in
    earning. SFAS No. 155 is effective for all financial
    instruments acquired , issued or subject to a remeasurement
    event occurring after the beginning of an entity’s



    61



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    first fiscal year that begins after September 15, 2006. We
    believe that the adoption of SFAS No. 155 will not
    have a material impact on our financial position, results of
    operations or cash flows.

 

    In March 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 156,
    Accounting for Servicing of Financial Assets — An
    Amendment to FASB Statement No. 140
    (“SFAS No. 156”).
    SFAS No. 156 requires entities to recognize a
    servicing asset or liability each time they undertake an
    obligation to service a financial asset by entering into a
    servicing contract in certain situations. This statement also
    requires all separately recognized servicing assets and
    servicing liabilities to be initially measured at fair value and
    permits a choice of either the amortization or fair value
    measurement method for subsequent measurement. The effective
    date of this statement is for annual periods beginning after
    September 15, 2006, with earlier adoption permitted as of
    the beginning of an entity’s fiscal year provided the
    entity has not issued any financial statements for that year. We
    do not plan to adopt SFAS No. 156 early, and we are
    currently assessing the impact on our Consolidated Financial
    Statements.

 

    In July 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation,
    FIN No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
    Taxes — An Interpretation of FASB Statement
    No. 109 (“FIN No. 48”).
    FIN No. 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in
    income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial
    statements in accordance with SFAS No. 109,
    Accounting for Income Taxes. It prescribes a recognition
    threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement
    recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected
    to be taken in a tax return. This new standard also provides
    guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and
    penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and
    transition. The provisions of FIN No. 48 are to be
    applied to all tax positions upon initial adoption of this
    standard. Only tax positions that meet the more
    likely-than-not
    recognition threshold at the effective date may be recognized or
    continue to be recognized upon adoption of FIN No. 48.
    The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of
    FIN No. 48 should be reported as an adjustment to the
    opening balance of retaining earnings (or other appropriate
    components of equity or net assets in the statement of financial
    position) for that fiscal year. The provisions of
    FIN No. 48 are effective for fiscal years beginning
    after December 15, 2006. We are currently evaluating the
    impact of applying the provisions of FIN No. 48.

 

    In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair
    Value Measurements (“SFAS No. 157”).
    SFAS No. 157 clarifies the principle that fair value
    should be based on the assumptions that market participants
    would use when pricing an asset or liability and establishes a
    fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the information used to
    develop those assumptions. Under the standard, fair value
    measurements would be separately disclosed by level within the
    fair value hierarchy. SFAS No. 157 is effective for
    financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after
    November 15, 2007, and interim periods within those fiscal
    years, with early adoption permitted. We believe that the
    adoption of SFAS No. 157 will not have a material
    impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash
    flows.

 

    In September 2006, the FASB issued FSP No. AUG AIR-1,
    Accounting for Planned Major Maintenance Activities
    (“FSP No. AUG AIR-1”). FSP No. AUG AIR-1
    prohibits the use of the
    accrued-in-advance
    method for accounting for major maintenance activities and
    confirms the acceptable methods of accounting for planned major
    maintenance activities. FSP No. AUG AIR-1 is effective the
    first fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2006. We
    believe that the adoption of FSP No. AUG AIR-1 will not
    have a material impact on our financial position, results of
    operations or cash flows.

 

    In September 2006, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued
    Staff Accounting Bulletin 108, Considering the Effects
    of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in
    Current Year Financial Statements
    (“SAB 108”). SAB 108 requires that
    public companies utilize a “dual-approach” to
    assessing the quantitative effects of financial misstatements.
    This dual approach includes both an income statement focused
    assessment and a balance sheet focused assessment. SAB 108
    is effective for fiscal years ending after November 15,
    2006. We adopted SAB 108 on December 31, 2006, and
    there was no impact on our consolidated financial statements.



    62



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

NOTE 2 —
    RESTATEMENT

 

Earnings
    Per Share

 

    We understated diluted earnings per share due to an incorrect
    calculation of our weighted shares outstanding for each of the
    first three quarters of 2004, for the year ended
    December 31, 2004 and for the quarter ended March 31,
    2005 In addition, we understated basic earnings per share due to
    an incorrect calculation of our weighted average basic shares
    outstanding for the quarter ended September 30, 2004.
    Consequently, we have restated our financial statements for each
    of those periods. The incorrect calculation resulted from a
    mathematical error and an improper application of
    SFAS No. 128.

 

    A restated earnings per share calculation for all affected
    periods reflecting the above adjustments to our results as
    previously restated (see following section), is presented below
    (amounts in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended March 31, 2005


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.02


 


 


    $


    0.11


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    17,789


 


 


 


    (3,094


    )


 


 


    14,695


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Year Ended December 31, 2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    0.07


 


 


    $


    0.02


 


 


    $


    0.09


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    11,959


 


 


 


    (2,449


    )


 


 


    9,510


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended September 30, 2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common
    share — basic
    



 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    0.02


 


 


    $


    0.06


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    0.01


 


 


    $


    0.05


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


 


    11,599


 


 


 


    (3,301


    )


 


 


    8,298


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    14,407


 


 


 


    (4,579


    )


 


 


    9,828


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended June 30, 2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    0.01


 


 


    $


    0.05


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    10,237


 


 


 


    (2,618


    )


 


 


    7,619


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


    63



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months Ended March 31, 2004


 




 


 


As



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Previously



 


 


 


 


 


As



 




 


 


Reported


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Restated


 



 





Income per common
    share — diluted
    



 


    $


    0.05


 


 


    $


    0.03


 


 


    $


    0.08


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Weighted average number of common
    shares outstanding:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


 


    5,762


 


 


 


    478


 


 


 


    6,240


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

AirComp
    Acquisition

 

    In connection with the formation of AirComp LLC in 2003, we,
    along with M-I L.L.C. contributed assets to AirComp in exchange
    for a 55% interest and 45% interest, respectively, in AirComp.
    We originally accounted for the formation of AirComp as a joint
    venture. However in February 2005, we determined that the
    transaction should have been accounted for using purchase
    accounting pursuant to SFAS No. 141, Business
    Combinations and recorded the sale of an interest in a
    subsidiary, in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting
    Bulletin No. 51, Accounting for Sales of Stock by a
    Subsidiary. Consequently, we restated our financial
    statements for the three quarters ended September 30, 2004,
    to reflect the following adjustments:

 

Increase
    in Book Value of Fixed Assets.

 

    Under joint venture accounting, we originally recorded the value
    of the assets contributed by M-I to AirComp at M-I’s
    historical cost of $6.9 million. Under purchase accounting,
    we increased the recorded value of the assets contributed by M-I
    by approximately $3.3 million to $10.3 million to
    reflect their fair market value as determined by a third party
    appraisal. In addition, under joint venture accounting, we
    established negative goodwill which reduced fixed assets in the
    amount of $1.6 million. The negative goodwill was amortized
    by us over the lives of the related fixed assets. Under purchase
    accounting, we increased fixed assets by $1.6 million to
    reverse the negative goodwill previously recorded and reversed
    amortization expenses recorded in 2004. Therefore, the cost of
    fixed assets was increased by a total of $4.9 million at
    the time of acquisition. As a result of the increase in fixed
    assets and the reversal of amortization of negative goodwill,
    depreciation expense increased.

 

    The 2004 financial statements have been restated from the
    previously filed interim financial statements included in
    Form 10-Q
    for the first, second and third quarters of 2004. The effect of
    the restatement on the individual quarterly financial statements
    is as follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Three Months



 


 


Three Months



 


 


Three Months



 




 


 


Ended



 


 


Ended



 


 


Ended



 




 


 


March 31,



 


 


June 30,



 


 


September 30,



 




 


 


2004


 


 


2004


 


 


2004


 



 





Net income (loss) attributed to
    common stockholders
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Previously reported
    



 


    $


    501


 


 


    $


    434


 


 


    $


    576


 





Adjustment —
    depreciation expense
    



 


 


    (139


    )


 


 


    (79


    )


 


 


    (79


    )





Adjustment — minority
    interest expense
    



 


 


    22


 


 


 


    22


 


 


 


    22


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Restated
    



 


    $


    384


 


 


    $


    377


 


 


    $


    519


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income (loss) per share, basic
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Previously reported
    



 


    $


    0.13


 


 


    $


    0.07


 


 


    $


    0.05


 





Total adjustments
    



 


 


    (0.03


    )


 


 


    (0.01


    )


 


 


    (0.01


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Restated
    



 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.06


 


 


    $


    0.04


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






    64



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



NOTE 3 —
    POST RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS

 

Medical
    And Life

 

    Pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization that was confirmed by the
    Bankruptcy Court after acceptances by our creditors and
    stockholders and was consummated on December 2, 1988, we
    assumed the contractual obligation to Simplicity Manufacturing,
    Inc. (SMI) to reimburse SMI for 50% of the actual cost of
    medical and life insurance claims for a select group of retirees
    (SMI Retirees) of the prior Simplicity Manufacturing Division of
    Allis-Chalmers. The actuarial present value of the expected
    retiree benefit obligation is determined by an actuary and is
    the amount that results from applying actuarial assumptions to
    (1) historical claims-cost data, (2) estimates for the
    time value of money (through discounts for interest) and
    (3) the probability of payment (including decrements for
    death, disability, withdrawal, or retirement) between today and
    expected date of benefit payments. As of December 31, 2006
    and 2005, we have post-retirement benefit obligations of
    $304,000 and $335,000, respectively.

 

401(k)
    Savings Plan

 

    On June 30, 2003, we adopted the 401(k) Profit Sharing Plan
    (the “Plan”). The Plan is a defined contribution
    savings plan designed to provide retirement income to our
    eligible employees. The Plan is intended to be qualified under
    Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
    amended. It is funded by voluntary pre-tax contributions from
    eligible employees who may contribute a percentage of their
    eligible compensation, limited and subject to statutory limits.
    The Plan is also funded by discretionary matching employer
    contributions from us. Eligible employees cannot participate in
    the Plan until they have attained the age of 21 and completed
    six-months of service with us. Each participant is 100% vested
    with respect to the participants’ contributions while our
    matching contributions are vested over a three-year period in
    accordance with the Plan document. Contributions are invested,
    as directed by the participant, in investment funds available
    under the Plan. Matching contributions of approximately
    $735,000, $114,000 and $35,000 were paid in 2006, 2005 and 2004,
    respectively.

 

NOTE 4 —
    ACQUISITIONS

 

    In September 2004, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of
    Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc. (“Safco”) for
    $1.0 million. Safco rented spiral drill pipe to the oil
    drilling industry. Safco has been renamed and is now
    Allis-Chalmers Rental Services, Inc.

 

    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of Tubular in
    exchange for 1.3 million shares of our common stock. The
    total value of the consideration paid to the seller, Jens
    Mortensen, was $6.4 million which was equal to the number
    of shares of common stock issued to Mr. Mortensen
    (1.3 million) multiplied by the last sale price ($4.95) of
    the common stock as reported on the American Stock Exchange on
    the date of issuance. This amount was treated as a contribution
    to stockholders’ equity. On the balance sheet, the
    $1.9 million minority interest in Tubular was eliminated.
    The balance of the contribution of $4.4 million was
    allocated as follows: In June 2004, we obtained an appraisal of
    the fixed assets of Tubular which valued the fixed assets at
    $20.1 million. The book value of the fixed assets was
    $15.8 million and the fixed assets appraised value was
    $4.3 million over the book value. We increased the value of
    our fixed assets by 19% of the amount of the excess of the
    appraised value over the book value, or $.8 million. The
    remaining balance of $3.6 million was allocated to goodwill.

 

    In November 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all the assets
    of Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc. and Marquis Bit Co.,
    L.L.C. collectively (“Diamond Air”) for
    $4.6 million in cash and the assumption of approximately
    $450,000 of accrued liabilities. We contributed
    $2.5 million and M-I L.L.C. contributed $2.1 million
    to AirComp LLC in order to fund the purchase. Goodwill of
    $375,000 and other intangible assets of $2.3 million were
    recorded in connection with the acquisition. Diamond Air
    provided air drilling technology



    65



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    and products to the oil and gas industry in West Texas, New
    Mexico and Oklahoma. Diamond Air is a leading brand of air
    hammers and hammer bit products.

 

    In December 2004, we acquired Downhole Injection Services, LLC
    (“Downhole”) for approximately $1.1 million in
    cash, 568,466 shares of our common stock and the assumption
    of approximately $950,000 of debt. Goodwill of $442,000 and
    other intangible assets of $795,000 were recorded in connection
    with the acquisition. Downhole provided economical chemical
    treatments to wells by inserting small diameter, stainless steel
    coiled tubing into producing oil and gas wells. In 2006,
    Downhole was merged into Allis-Chalmers Production Services Inc.

 

    On April 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock
    of Delta Rental Service, Inc. (“Delta”) for
    $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of our common
    stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000. The purchase
    price was allocated to fixed assets and inventory. Delta,
    located in Lafayette, Louisiana, was a rental tool company
    providing specialty rental items to the oil and gas industry
    such as spiral heavy weight drill pipe, test plugs used to test
    blow-out preventors, well head retrieval tools, spacer spools
    and assorted handling tools. In 2006, Delta was merged into
    Rental.

 

    On May 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital
    stock of Capcoil Tubing Services, Inc. (“Capcoil”) for
    $2.7 million in cash, 168,161 shares of our common
    stock and the payment or assumption of approximately
    $1.3 million of debt. Capcoil, located in Kilgore, Texas,
    is engaged in downhole well servicing by providing coil tubing
    services to enhance production from existing wells. Goodwill of
    $184,000 and other identifiable intangible assets of
    $1.4 million were recorded in connection with the
    acquisition. In 2006, Capcoil was renamed Allis-Chalmers
    Production Services Inc.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T Enterprises, Inc., based in South Texas, for
    $6.0 million in cash. The equipment includes compressors,
    boosters, mist pumps and vehicles. Goodwill of $82,000 and other
    identifiable intangible assets of $1.5 million were
    recorded in connection with the acquisition.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I L.L.C.
    (“M-I”) its 45% interest in AirComp and subordinated
    note in the principal amount of $4.8 million issued by
    AirComp, for which we paid M-I $7.1 million in cash and
    issued to M-I a $4.0 million subordinated note bearing
    interest at 5% per annum. As a result, we now own 100% of
    AirComp

 

    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding capital stock of Target Energy Inc.
    (“Target”) for $1.3 million in cash and
    forgiveness of a lease receivable of approximately
    $0.6 million. The purchase price was allocated to the fixed
    assets of Target. The results of Target are included in our
    directional and horizontal drilling segment as their Measure
    While Drilling equipment is utilized in that segment. Target was
    merged with Strata in December 2006.

 

    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for approximately
    $15.6 million. These assets are located in Corpus Christi,
    Texas; Kilgore, Texas; Lafayette, Louisiana and Houma, Louisiana.



    66



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    Effective January 1, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of Specialty Rental Tools, Inc., or Specialty,
    for $96.0 million in cash. Specialty, located in Lafayette,
    Louisiana, was engaged in the rental of high quality drill pipe,
    heavy weight spiral drill pipe, tubing work strings, blow-out
    preventors, choke manifolds and various valves and handling
    tools for oil and natural gas drilling. The following table
    summarizes the allocation of the purchase price to the estimated
    fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the
    date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Current assets
    



 


    $


    7,645


 





Property and equipment
    



 


 


    90,622


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total assets acquired
    



 


 


    98,267


 




 


 


 


 


 





Current liabilities
    



 


 


    2,193


 





Long-term debt
    



 


 


    74


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities assumed
    



 


 


    2,267


 




 


 


 


 


 





Net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    96,000


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Approximately $588,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Specialty acquisition. Specialty’s historical property and
    equipment values were increased by approximately
    $71.6 million based on third-party valuations. Specialty
    was merged into Rental in 2006.

 

    Effective April 1, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of Rogers Oil Tools, Inc., or Rogers, based in
    Lafayette, Louisiana, for a total consideration of approximately
    $13.7 million, which includes $11.3 million in cash,
    $1.6 million in our common stock and a $750,000 three-year
    promissory note. In addition, we purchased all the patents and
    proprietary technology that Tommie L. Rogers, Rogers’
    founder and Chief Executive Officer, developed at Rogers. Rogers
    sells, services and rents power drill pipe tongs and accessories
    and rental tongs for snubbing and well control applications.
    Rogers also provides specialized tong operators for rental jobs.
    The following table summarizes the allocation of the purchase
    price to the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and
    liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Current assets
    



 


    $


    4,520


 





Property and equipment
    



 


 


    9,866


 





Intangible assets
    



 


 


    4,941


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total assets acquired
    



 


 


    19,327


 




 


 


 


 


 





Current liabilities
    



 


 


    1,717


 





Deferred income tax liabilities
    



 


 


    3,760


 





Other long-term liabilities
    



 


 


    150


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities assumed
    



 


 


    5,627


 




 


 


 


 


 





Net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    13,700


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Approximately $380,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Rogers acquisition. Rogers’ historical property and
    equipment values were increased by approximately
    $8.4 million based on third-party valuations. Intangible
    assets include $2.8 million assigned to goodwill,
    $2.0 million assigned to patents and $150,000 assigned to
    non-compete based on third-party valuations and employment
    contracts. The amortizable intangibles have a weighted-average
    useful life of 11.3 years. Rogers was merged into Tubular
    in December 2006.

 

    Effective August 14, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of DLS, based in Argentina, for a total
    consideration of approximately $117.9 million, which
    includes $93.7 million in cash, $38.1 million in our
    common stock, $3.4 million of acquisition costs, less
    approximately $17.3 million of debt assigned to us. DLS



    67



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    operates a fleet of 51 rigs, including 20 drilling rigs, 18
    workover rigs and 12 pulling rigs in Argentina and one drilling
    rig in Bolivia. The following table summarizes the preliminary
    allocation of the purchase price to the estimated fair value of
    the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of
    acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Current assets
    



 


    $


    52,033


 





Property and equipment
    



 


 


    130,389


 





Other long-term assets
    



 


 


    21


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total assets acquired
    



 


 


    182,443


 




 


 


 


 


 





Current liabilities
    



 


 


    34,386


 





Long-term debt, less current
    portion
    



 


 


    5,921


 





Intercompany note
    



 


 


    17,256


 





Deferred tax liabilities
    



 


 


    6,948


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities assumed
    



 


 


    64,511


 




 


 


 


 


 





Net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    117,932


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Approximately $3.4 million of costs were incurred in
    relation to the DLS acquisition. DLS’ historical property
    and equipment values were increased by approximately
    $22.7 million based on third-party valuations. We do not
    expect any material differences from the preliminary allocation
    of the purchase price and the final purchase price allocations.

 

    On October 16, 2006, we acquired 100% of the outstanding
    stock of Petro Rental, based in Lafayette, Louisiana, for a
    total consideration of approximately $33.6 million, which
    includes $20.2 million in cash, $3.8 million in our
    common stock and payment of $9.6 million of existing Petro
    Rental debt. Petro-Rental provides a variety of
    production-related rental tools and equipment and services,
    including wire line services and equipment, land and offshore
    pumping services and coiled tubing. The following table
    summarizes the preliminary allocation of the purchase price to
    the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities
    assumed at the date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Current assets
    



 


    $


    8,175


 





Property and equipment
    



 


 


    28,792


 





Intangible assets
    



 


 


    5,811


 





Other long-term assets
    



 


 


    2


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total assets acquired
    



 


 


    42,780


 




 


 


 


 


 





Current liabilities
    



 


 


    2,135


 





Deferred tax liabilities
    



 


 


    6,954


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities assumed
    



 


 


    9,089


 




 


 


 


 


 





Net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    33,691


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Approximately $82,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Petro Rental acquisition. Petro Rental’s historical
    property and equipment values were increased by approximately
    $13.4 million based on third-party valuations. We do not
    expect any material differences from the preliminary allocation
    of the purchase price and the final purchase price allocations.
    Intangible assets include $3.0 million assigned to goodwill
    and $2.8 million assigned to customer relationships based
    on third-party valuations. The amortizable intangibles have a
    weighted-average useful life of 10 years.

 

    Effective December 1, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of Tanus Argentina S.A. (“Tanus”),
    based in Argentina, for a total consideration of
    $2.5 million. Tanus is engaged in the research and



    68



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    manufacturing of additives for the oil, natural gas and water
    well drilling and completion fluids in Argentina. The following
    table summarizes the preliminary allocation of the purchase
    price to the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and
    liabilities assumed at the date of the acquisition (in
    thousands).

 



  
  
  
  
  




Current assets
    



 


    $


    2,254


 





Property and equipment
    



 


 


    2


 





Goodwill
    



 


 


    1,504


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total assets acquired
    



 


 


    3,760


 





Current liabilities
    



 


 


    1,243


 




 


 


 


 


 





Net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    2,517


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Approximately $17,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Tanus acquisition. We do not expect any material differences
    from the preliminary allocation of the purchase price and the
    final purchase price allocations. The results of Tanus are
    reported with DLS under our international drilling segment.

 

    On December 18, 2006, we acquired substantially all of the
    assets of Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc., or OGR,
    based in Morgan City, Louisiana, for a total consideration of
    approximately $342.4 million, which includes
    $291.0 million in cash, and $51.4 million in our
    common stock. The following table summarizes the preliminary
    allocation of the purchase price to the estimated fair value of
    the assets acquired at the date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Current assets
    



 


    $


    12,735


 





Property and equipment
    



 


 


    199,015


 





Investments
    



 


 


    4,618


 





Intangible assets
    



 


 


    128,976


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total assets acquired
    



 


    $


    345,344


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Approximately $3.0 million of costs were incurred in
    relation to the OGR Rental acquisition. OGR’s historical
    property and equipment values were increased by approximately
    $168.9 million based on third-party valuations. We do not
    expect any material differences from the preliminary allocation
    of the purchase price and the final purchase price allocations.
    Intangible assets include $106.1 million assigned to
    goodwill, $22.0 million to customer relations, $831,000 to
    patents and $35,000 assigned to employment agreements based on
    third-party valuations. The amortizable intangibles have a
    weighted-average useful life of 10.1 years.

 

    The acquisitions were accounted for using the purchase method of
    accounting. The results of operations of the acquired entities
    since the date of acquisition are included in our consolidated
    income statement.



    69



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    The following unaudited pro forma consolidated summary financial
    information for the year ended December 31, 2006
    illustrates the effects of the acquisitions and the related
    public offerings of debt and equity for Rogers, DLS,
    Petro-Rentals and OGR as if the acquisitions occurred as of
    January 1, 2006, based on the historical results of the
    acquisitions. The following unaudited pro forma consolidated
    summary financial information for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 illustrates the effects of the
    acquisitions and the related public offerings of debt and equity
    for Delta, Capcoil, W.T., the minority interest in AirComp,
    Specialty, Rogers, DLS, Petro-Rentals and OGR as if the
    acquisitions had occurred as of January 1, 2005, based on
    the historical results of the acquisitions. The following
    unaudited pro forma consolidated summary financial information
    for the year ended December 31, 2004 illustrates the
    effects of the acquisitions and the related public offerings of
    debt and equity for Diamond Air, Downhole, Delta, Capcoil, W.T.,
    the minority interest in AirComp, Specialty, Rogers, DLS,
    Petro-Rentals and OGR as if the acquisitions had occurred as of
    beginning of the period, based on the historical results of the
    acquisitions (unaudited). The historical results for OGR are
    based on their historical year end of October 31 (in
    thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    502,418


 


 


    $


    346,230


 


 


    $


    273,825


 





Operating income
    



 


    $


    93,082


 


 


    $


    49,868


 


 


    $


    38,308


 





Net income (loss)
    



 


    $


    32,358


 


 


    $


    1,264


 


 


    $


    (7,849


    )





Net income (loss) per common share
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.96


 


 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    (0.33


    )





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.94


 


 


    $


    0.04


 


 


    $


    (0.33


    )





 

NOTE 5 —
    INVENTORIES

 

    Inventories are comprised of the following (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31,



 


 


December 31,



 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Manufactured
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Finished goods
    



 


    $


    1,476


 


 


    $


    1,402


 





Work in process
    



 


 


    2,266


 


 


 


    787


 





Raw materials
    



 


 


    2,638


 


 


 


    233


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total manufactured
    



 


 


    6,380


 


 


 


    2,422


 





Hammers
    



 


 


    1,016


 


 


 


    584


 





Drive pipe
    



 


 


    716


 


 


 


    666


 





Rental supplies
    



 


 


    1,845


 


 


 


    64


 





Chemicals and drilling fluids
    



 


 


    2,673


 


 


 


    201


 





Rig parts and related inventory
    



 


 


    9,762


 


 


 


    —


 





Coiled tubing and related inventory
    



 


 


    1,627


 


 


 


    1,145


 





Shop supplies and related inventory
    



 


 


    4,596


 


 


 


    863


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total inventory
    



 


    $


    28,615


 


 


    $


    5,945


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    70



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



NOTE 6 —
    PROPERTY AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS

 

    Property and equipment is comprised of the following at
    December 31 (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Depreciation



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Period


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Land
    



 


 


    —


 


 


    $


    1,810


 


 


    $


    27


 





Building and improvements
    



 


 


    15-20 years


 


 


 


    5,392


 


 


 


    637


 





Transportation equipment
    



 


 


3-10 years


 


 


 


    22,744


 


 


 


    7,772


 





Drill pipe and rental equipment
    



 


 


3-20 years


 


 


 


    321,821


 


 


 


    6,813


 





Drilling, workover and pulling rigs
    



 


 


    20 years


 


 


 


    120,517


 


 


 


    —


 





Machinery and equipment
    



 


 


3-20 years


 


 


 


    105,926


 


 


 


    70,189


 





Furniture, computers, software and
    leasehold improvements
    



 


 


    3-7 years


 


 


 


    3,522


 


 


 


    2,073


 





Construction in
    progress — equipment
    



 


 


    N/A


 


 


 


    2,269


 


 


 


    3,059


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


    584,001


 


 


 


    90,570


 





Less: accumulated depreciation
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


    (29,743


    )


 


 


    (9,996


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Property and equipment, net
    



 


 


 


 


 


    $


    554,258


 


 


    $


    80,574


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The net book value of equipment recorded under capital leases
    was $1.0 million and $1.1 million at December 31,
    2006 and 2005, respectively.

 

    Intangible assets are as follows at December 31 (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Amortization



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Period


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Intellectual property
    



 


 


    20 years


 


 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    1,009


 





Non-compete agreements
    



 


 


    3-5 years


 


 


 


    4,580


 


 


 


    4,630


 





Customer relationships
    



 


 


    10 years


 


 


 


    27,552


 


 


 


    2,954


 





Patent
    



 


 


    12-15 years


 


 


 


    3,327


 


 


 


    496


 





Other intangible assets
    



 


 


    2-10 years


 


 


 


    847


 


 


 


    857


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


    37,315


 


 


 


    9,946


 





Less: accumulated amortization
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


    (4,475


    )


 


 


    (3,163


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Intangibles assets, net
    



 


 


 


 


 


    $


    32,840


 


 


    $


    6,783


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 




 


 


Gross



 


 


Accumulated



 


 


Current Year



 


 


Gross



 


 


Accumulated



 


 


Current Year



 




 


 


Value


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Value


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Amortization


 



 





Intellectual property
    



 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    349


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    293


 


 


    $


    54


 





Non-compete agreements
    



 


 


    4,580


 


 


 


    2,707


 


 


 


    1,091


 


 


 


    4,630


 


 


 


    1,916


 


 


 


    884


 





Customer relationships
    



 


 


    27,552


 


 


 


    789


 


 


 


    449


 


 


 


    2,954


 


 


 


    540


 


 


 


    274


 





Patent
    



 


 


    3,327


 


 


 


    203


 


 


 


    165


 


 


 


    496


 


 


 


    39


 


 


 


    33


 





Other intangible assets
    



 


 


    847


 


 


 


    427


 


 


 


    97


 


 


 


    857


 


 


 


    375


 


 


 


    3


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    37,315


 


 


    $


    4,475


 


 


    $


    1,857


 


 


    $


    9,946


 


 


    $


    3,163


 


 


    $


    1,248


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    71



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    Future amortization of intangible assets at December 31,
    2006 is as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Intangible Amortization by Period


 




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


2011 and



 




 


 


2007


 


 


2008


 


 


2009


 


 


2010


 


 


Thereafter


 



 





Intellectual property
    



 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    55


 


 


    $


    440


 





Non-compete agreements
    



 


 


    887


 


 


 


    564


 


 


 


    362


 


 


 


    60


 


 


 


    —


 





Customer relationships
    



 


 


    2,743


 


 


 


    2,740


 


 


 


    2,740


 


 


 


    2,740


 


 


 


    15,800


 





Patent
    



 


 


    274


 


 


 


    274


 


 


 


    274


 


 


 


    274


 


 


 


    2,028


 





Other intangible assets
    



 


 


    112


 


 


 


    107


 


 


 


    90


 


 


 


    80


 


 


 


    31


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total Intangible Amortization
    



 


    $


    4,071


 


 


    $


    3,740


 


 


    $


    3,521


 


 


    $


    3,209


 


 


    $


    18,299


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 7 —
    


INCOME
    TAXES



 

    We had income before income taxes of $35.9 million,
    $8.5 million and $1.4 million in the U.S. for the
    years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
    In 2006, we also had income before income taxes of
    $11.1 million in
    non-U.S. countries.
    We treat the withholding taxes incurred by our
    U.S. subsidiaries in foreign countries as foreign tax,
    although we do anticipate using those tax payments to offset
    U.S. tax.

 

    The income tax provision consists of the following (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Current income tax expense:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Federal
    



 


    $


    5,865


 


 


    $


    123


 


 


    $


    —


 





State
    



 


 


    898


 


 


 


    595


 


 


 


    —


 





Foreign
    



 


 


    2,442


 


 


 


    626


 


 


 


    514


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


    9,205


 


 


 


    1,344


 


 


 


    514


 





Deferred income tax expense
    (benefit):
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Federal
    



 


 


    (946


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





State
    



 


 


    573


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Foreign
    



 


 


    2,588


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


    2,215


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    11,420


 


 


    $


    1,344


 


 


    $


    514


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    We are required to file a consolidated U.S. federal income
    tax return. We pay foreign income taxes in Argentina related to
    DLS’s operations and in Mexico related to Allis-Chalmers
    Tubular Services’ revenues from Matyep. There are
    approximately $2.4 million of U.S. foreign tax credits
    available to us. Our foreign tax credits begin to expire in the
    year 2007.



    72



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    The following table reconciles the U.S. statutory tax rate
    to our actual tax rate:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Statutory income tax rate
    



 


 


    35.0


    %


 


 


    34.0


    %


 


 


    34.0


    %





State taxes, net of federal benefit
    



 


 


    2.1


 


 


 


    6.1


 


 


 


    —


 





Valuation allowances
    



 


 


    (57.7


    )


 


 


    (98.7


    )


 


 


    (209.4


    )





Nondeductible items, permanent
    differences and other
    



 


 


    44.9


 


 


 


    74.4


 


 


 


    212.0


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Effective tax rate
    



 


 


    24.3


    %


 


 


    15.8


    %


 


 


    36.6


    %




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Significant components of deferred income tax assets and the
    related allowance as of December 31, were as follows (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Deferred income tax assets:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net future (taxable) deductible
    items
    



 


    $


    899


 


 


    $


    384


 





Share based compensation
    



 


 


    578


 


 


 


    —


 





Net operating loss carry forwards
    



 


 


    1,698


 


 


 


    5,656


 





Foreign tax credit
    



 


 


    2,420


 


 


 


    —


 





A-C Reorganization Trust and
    Product Liability Trust claims
    



 


 


    5,500


 


 


 


    29,098


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total deferred income tax assets
    



 


 


    11,095


 


 


 


    35,138


 





Valuation allowance
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (27,131


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net deferred income tax assets
    



 


 


    11,095


 


 


 


    8,007


 





Deferred income tax liabilities
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    (28,226


    )


 


 


    (8,007


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net deferred income tax assets
    (liabilities)
    



 


    $


    (17,131


    )


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net current deferred income tax
    asset
    



 


    $


    2,822


 


 


    $


    —


 





Net noncurrent deferred income tax
    liability
    



 


 


    (19,953


    )


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net deferred income tax assets
    (liabilities)
    



 


    $


    (17,131


    )


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Net future tax-deductible items relate primarily to timing
    differences. Timing differences are differences between the tax
    basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in
    the financial statements that will result in differences between
    income for tax purposes and income for financial statement
    purposes in future years.

 

    The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains provisions that limit the
    utilization of net operating loss and tax credit carry forwards
    if there has been a “change of ownership” as described
    in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. Such a change
    of ownership may limit our utilization of our net operating loss
    and tax credit carry forwards, and could be triggered by a
    public offering or by subsequent sales of securities by us or
    our stockholders. This provision has limited the amount of net
    operating losses available to us currently, but we are
    projecting the release of net operating losses under the
    provisions of Section 382. Net operating loss carry
    forwards for tax purposes at December 31, 2006 and 2005
    were estimated to be $4.9 million and $16.6 million,
    respectively, expiring through 2024.

 

    Prior to 2006, we did not record an asset for the
    U.S. foreign tax credit as we believed they would not be
    recoverable based on our taxable income.



    73



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    Our 1988 Plan of Reorganization established the A-C
    Reorganization Trust to settle claims and to make distributions
    to creditors and certain stockholders. We transferred cash and
    certain other property to the A-C Reorganization Trust on
    December 2, 1988. Payments made by us to the A-C
    Reorganization Trust did not generate tax deductions for us upon
    the transfer but generate deductions for us as the A-C
    Reorganization Trust makes payments to holders of claims. The
    Plan of Reorganization also created a trust to process and
    liquidate product liability claims. Payments made by the A-C
    Reorganization Trust to the product liability trust did not
    generate current tax deductions for us upon the payment but
    generate deductions for us as the product liability trust makes
    payments to liquidate claims or incurs other expenses. We
    believe the aforementioned trusts are grantor trusts and
    therefore we include the income or loss of these trusts in our
    income or loss for tax purposes, resulting in an adjustment of
    the tax basis of net operating and capital loss carry forwards.
    The income or loss of these trusts is not included in our
    results of operations for financial reporting purposes.

 

    A valuation allowance is established for deferred tax assets
    when management, based upon available information, considers it
    more likely than not that a benefit from such assets will not be
    realized. The valuation allowance was relieved in 2006 due to
    the increase in our operating results for the year ended
    December 31, 2006, which we project will utilize all of the
    net operating loss carryforwards that are available to us and
    the revaluation of the deferred tax asset related to the A-C
    Reorganization Trust and Product Liability Trust. In 2005 and
    2004, we had a valuation allowance equal to the excess of
    deferred tax assets over deferred tax liabilities as we were
    unable to determine that it was more likely than not that the
    deferred tax asset will be realized.

 







NOTE 8 —
    


DEBT



 

    Our long-term debt consists of the following: (in thousands)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Senior notes
    



 


    $


    255,000


 


 


    $


    —


 





Bridge loan
    



 


 


    300,000


 


 


 


    —


 





Bank term loans
    



 


 


    7,302


 


 


 


    42,090


 





Revolving line of credit
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,400


 





Subordinated note payable to M-I
    LLC
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,000


 





Subordinated seller note
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,031


 





Seller note
    



 


 


    900


 


 


 


    850


 





Obligations under non-compete
    agreements
    



 


 


    270


 


 


 


    698


 





Notes payable to former directors
    



 


 


    32


 


 


 


    96


 





Real estate loan
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    548


 





Equipment & vehicle
    installment notes
    



 


 


    3,502


 


 


 


    1,939


 





Insurance premium financing
    



 


 


    1,025


 


 


 


    —


 





Capital lease obligations
    



 


 


    414


 


 


 


    917


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total debt
    



 


 


    568,445


 


 


 


    60,569


 





Less: short-term debt and current
    maturities
    



 


 


    6,999


 


 


 


    5,632


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Long-term debt obligations
    



 


    $


    561,446


 


 


    $


    54,937


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, our debt was
    approximately $568.4 million and $60.6 million,
    respectively. Our weighted average interest rate for all of our
    outstanding debt was approximately 9.8% at December 31,
    2006 and 7.5% at December 31, 2005.



    74



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    Maturities of debt obligations at December 31, 2006 are as
    follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Debt


 


 


Capital Leases


 


 


Total


 



 





Year Ending:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





December 31, 2007
    



 


    $


    6,585


 


 


    $


    414


 


 


    $


    6,999


 





December 31, 2008
    



 


 


    53,146


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    53,146


 





December 31, 2009
    



 


 


    1,500


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,500


 





December 31, 2010
    



 


 


    1,450


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,450


 





December 31, 2011
    



 


 


    350


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    350


 





Thereafter
    



 


 


    505,000


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    505,000


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    568,031


 


 


    $


    414


 


 


    $


    568,445


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Senior
    notes, bank loans and line of credit agreements

 

    On January 18, 2006 and August 14, 2006, we closed on
    private offerings, to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to
    Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, of $160.0 and
    $95.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior
    notes, respectively. The senior notes are due January 15,
    2014 and bear interest at 9.0%. The proceeds were used to fund
    the acquisitions of Specialty and DLS, to repay existing debt
    and for general corporate purposes.

 

    On December 18, 2006, we closed on a $300.0 million
    senior unsecured bridge loan. The bridge loan is due
    18 months after closing and bears a weighted average
    interest rate of 10.6%. The bridge loan, which was repaid on
    January 29, 2007, was used to fund the acquisition of OGR.

 

    Prior to January 18, 2006, we were party to a July 2005
    credit agreement that provided for the following senior secured
    credit facilities:

 







 
    • 


    A $13.0 million revolving line of credit. Borrowings were
    limited to 85% of eligible accounts receivable plus 50% of
    eligible inventory (up to a maximum of $2.0 million of
    borrowings based on inventory). This line of credit was to be
    used to finance working capital requirements and other general
    corporate purposes, including the issuance of standby letters of
    credit. Outstanding borrowings under this line of credit were
    $6.4 million at a margin above prime and LIBOR rates plus
    margin averaging approximately 8.1% as of December 31, 2005.


 

 
    • 


    Two term loans totaling $42.0 million. Outstanding
    borrowings under these term loans were $42.0 million as of
    December 31, 2005. These loans were at LIBOR rates plus a
    margin which averages approximately 7.8% at December 31,
    2005.



 

    Borrowings under the July 2005 credit facilities were to mature
    in July 2007. Amounts outstanding under the term loans as of
    July 2006 were to be repaid in monthly principal payments based
    on a 48 month repayment schedule with the remaining balance
    due at maturity. Additionally, during the second year, we were
    to be required to prepay the remaining balance of the term loans
    by 75% of excess cash flow, if any, after debt service and
    capital expenditures. The interest rate payable on borrowings
    was based on a margin over the London Interbank Offered Rate,
    referred to as LIBOR, or the prime rate, and there was a 0.5%
    fee on the undrawn portion of the revolving line of credit. The
    margin over LIBOR was to increase by 1.0% in the second year.

 

    All amounts outstanding under our July 2005 credit agreement
    were paid off with the proceeds of our senior notes offering on
    January 18, 2006. On January 18, 2006, we also
    executed an amended and restated credit agreement which provides
    for a $25.0 million revolving line of credit with a
    maturity of January 2010. Our January 2006 amended and restated
    credit agreement contains customary events of default and
    financial



    75



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    covenants and limits our ability to incur additional
    indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay dividends or make
    other distributions, create liens and sell assets. Our
    obligations under the January 2006 amended and restated credit
    agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets
    excluding the DLS assets, but including
    2/3
    of our shares of DLS. At December 31, 2006, no amounts were
    borrowed on the facility but availability is reduced by
    outstanding letters of credit of $9.7 million.

 

    As part of our acquisition of DLS, we assumed various bank loans
    with floating interest rates based on LIBOR plus a margin and
    terms ranging from 2 to 5 years. The weighted average
    interest rates on these loans was 7.0% at December 31,
    2006. The bank loans are denominated in U.S. dollars and
    the outstanding amount due as of December 31, 2006 was
    $7.3 million.

 

    Tubular had two bank term loans with a remaining balance $90,000
    at December 31, 2005, with interest accruing at a floating
    interest rate based on prime plus 2.0% (9.25% at
    December 31, 2005). Monthly principal payments were $13,000
    plus interest. The maturity date of one of the loans, with a
    balance of $60,000, was September 17, 2006, while the
    second loan, with a balance of $30,000, had a final maturity of
    January 12, 2007. The balances of these two loans were
    repaid in full in January 2006 with the proceeds from our
    senior notes offering.

 

Notes
    payable and real estate loan

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I its 45% equity
    interest in AirComp and the subordinated note in the principal
    amount of $4.8 million issued by AirComp, for which we paid
    M-I $7.1 million in cash and issued a new $4.0 million
    subordinated note bearing interest at 5.0% per annum. The
    subordinated note issued to M-I required quarterly interest
    payments and the principal amount was due October 9, 2007.
    Contingent upon a future equity offering, the subordinated note
    was convertible into up to 700,000 shares of our common
    stock at a conversion price equal to the market value of the
    common stock at the time of conversion. This note was repaid
    from the proceeds of our offering of $95.0 million of
    9.0% senior notes, which we completed in August 2006.

 

    As of December 31, 2005, Tubular had a subordinated note
    outstanding and payable to Jens Mortensen, the seller of Tubular
    and one of our directors, in the amount of $3.0 million
    with a fixed interest rate of 7.5%. Interest was payable
    quarterly and the final maturity of the note was
    January 31, 2006. The subordinated note was subordinated to
    the rights of our bank lenders. The balance of this subordinated
    note was repaid in full in January 2006 with proceeds from our
    senior notes offering.

 

    As part of the acquisition of Mountain Air in 2001, we issued a
    note to the sellers of Mountain Air in the original amount of
    $2.2 million accruing interest at a rate of 5.75% per
    annum. The note was reduced to $1.5 million as a result of
    the settlement of a legal action against the sellers in 2003. In
    March 2005, we reached an agreement with the sellers and holders
    of the note as a result of an action brought against us by the
    sellers. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid the holders
    of the note $1.0 million in cash, and agreed to pay an
    additional $350,000 on June 1, 2006, and an additional
    $150,000 on June 1, 2007, in settlement of all claims. At
    December 31, 2006 and 2005 the outstanding amounts due were
    $150,000 and $500,000, respectively.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Delta, we issued to the
    sellers a note in the amount of $350,000. The note bore interest
    at 2% and the principal and accrued interest was repaid on its
    maturity of April 1, 2006. At December 31, 2005 the
    outstanding amounts due was $350,000. The note was repaid during
    2006. In connection with the acquisition of Rogers, we issued to
    the seller a note in the amount of $750,000. The note bears
    interest at 5.0% and is due April 3, 2009.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Tubular, we agreed to pay a
    total of $1.2 million to Mr. Mortensen in exchange for
    a non-compete agreement. Monthly payments of $20,576 are due
    under this agreement through January 31, 2007. In
    connection with the purchase of Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc.,
    or Safco, we also agreed



    76



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    to pay a total of $150,000 to the sellers in exchange for a
    non-compete agreement. We are required to make annual payments
    of $50,000 through September 30, 2007. In connection with
    the purchase of Capcoil, we agreed to pay a total of $500,000 to
    two management employees in exchange for non-compete agreements.
    We are required to make annual payments of $110,000 through May
    2008. Total amounts due under these non-compete agreements at
    December 31, 2006 and 2005 were $270,000 and $698,000,
    respectively.

 

    In 2000 we compensated directors, including current directors
    Nederlander and Toboroff, who served on the board of directors
    from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation, by
    issuing promissory notes totaling $325,000. The notes bear
    interest at the rate of 5.0%. At December 31, 2006 and
    2005, the principal and accrued interest on these notes totaled
    approximately $32,000 and $96,000, respectively.

 

    We also had a real estate loan which was payable in equal
    monthly installments of $4,344 with the remaining outstanding
    balance due on January 1, 2010. The loan had a floating
    interest rate based on prime plus 2.0%. The outstanding
    principal balance was $548,000 at December 31, 2005. The
    balance of this loan was repaid in full in January 2006 with
    proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 

Other
    debt

 

    We have various rig and equipment financing loans with interest
    rates ranging from 5.0% to 8.7% and terms of 2 to 5 years.
    As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the outstanding balances
    for rig and equipment financing loans were $3.5 million and
    $1.9 million, respectively. In April 2006 and August 2006,
    we obtained insurance premium financings in the amount of
    $1.9 million and $896,000 with fixed interest rates of 5.6%
    and 6.0%, respectively. Under terms of the agreements, amounts
    outstanding are paid over 10 month and 11 month
    repayment schedules. The outstanding balance of these notes was
    approximately $1.0 million as of December 31, 2006. We
    also have various capital leases with terms that expire in 2008.
    As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, amounts outstanding under
    capital leases were $414,000 and $917,000, respectively. In
    January 2006, we prepaid $350,000 of the outstanding equipment
    loans with proceeds from our senior notes offering.

 







NOTE 9 —
    


COMMITMENTS
    AND CONTINGENCIES



 

    We have placed orders for capital equipment totaling
    $42.3 million to be received and paid for through 2007. Of
    this amount, $27.4 million is for rental equipment,
    principally drillpipe, $4.6 million is for six measurement
    while drilling kits and ancillary equipment for our directional
    drilling segment and $3.4 million is for two new capillary
    tubing units for our production services segment and
    $4.5 million is for casing and tubing tools and equipment.
    The orders are subject to cancellation with minimal loss of
    prior cash deposits, if any.

 

    We rent office space on a five-year lease which expires November
    2009. We also rent certain other facilities and shop yards for
    equipment storage and maintenance. Facility rent expense for the
    years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 was
    $1.6 million, $987,000 and $577,000, respectively.

 

    At December 31, 2006, future minimum rental commitments for
    all operating leases are as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  




Years Ending:
    



 


 


 


 





December 31, 2007
    



 


    $


    2,013


 





December 31, 2008
    



 


 


    1,716


 





December 31, 2009
    



 


 


    942


 





December 31, 2010
    



 


 


    160


 





December 31, 2011
    



 


 


    117


 





Thereafter
    



 


 


    470


 




 


 


 


 


 





Total
    



 


    $


    5,418


 




 


 


 


 


 







    77



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)









NOTE 10 —
    


STOCKHOLDERS’
    EQUITY



 

    On March 3, 2004, we entered into an agreement with an
    investment banking firm whereby they would provide underwriting
    and fundraising activities on our behalf. In exchange for their
    services, the investment banking firm received a stock purchase
    warrant to purchase 340,000 shares of common stock at an
    exercise price of $2.50 per share. The warrant was
    exercised in August of 2005. The fair value of the total
    warrants issued in connection with the fundraising activities
    was established in accordance with the Black-Scholes valuation
    model and as a result, $641,000 was added to stockholders’
    equity. The following assumptions were utilized to determine
    fair value: no dividend yield; expected volatility of 89.7%;
    risk free interest rate of 7.00%; and expected life of five
    years.

 

    During 2004, we issued two warrants (“Warrants A and
    B”) for the purchase of 233,000 total shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share and one
    warrant for the purchase of 67,000 shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $5.00 per share
    (“Warrant C”) in connection with subordinated debt
    financing. Warrants A and B were redeemed for a total of
    $1,500,000 on December 7, 2004. The fair value of Warrant C
    was established in accordance with the Black-Scholes valuation
    model and as a result, $47,000 was added to stockholders’
    equity. The following assumptions were utilized to determine
    fair value: no dividend yield; expected volatility of 67.24%;
    risk free interest rate of 5.00%; and expected life of four
    years.

 

    On April 2, 2004, we completed the following transactions:

 







 
    • 


    In exchange for an investment of $2.0 million, we issued
    620,000 shares of our common stock for a purchase price
    equal to $2.50 per share, and issued warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $2.50 per share, expiring on April 1, 2006, to an
    investor group (the “Investor Group”) consisting of
    entities affiliated with Donald and Christopher Engel and
    directors Robert Nederlander and Leonard Toboroff. The aggregate
    purchase price for the common stock was $1.55 million and
    the fair value for the warrants was $450,000.


 

 
    • 


    Energy Spectrum converted its 3,500,000 shares of
    Series A 10% Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock,
    including accrued dividend rights, into 1,718,090 shares of
    common stock. Energy Spectrum was granted the preferred stock in
    connection with the Strata acquisition.



 

    On August 10, 2004, we completed the private placement of
    3,504,667 shares of our common stock at a price of
    $3.00 per share. Our net proceeds, after selling
    commissions and expenses, were approximately $9.6 million.
    We issued shares pursuant to an exemption from the Securities
    Act of 1933, and agreed to subsequently register the common
    stock under the Securities Act of 1933 to allow investors to
    resell the common stock in public markets.

 

    On September 30, 2004, we completed the private placement
    of 1,956,634 shares of our common stock at a price of
    $3.00 per share. Our net proceeds, after selling commission
    and expenses, were approximately $5.3 million. We issued
    shares pursuant to an exemption from the Securities Act of 1933,
    and agreed to subsequently register the common stock under the
    Securities Act of 1933 to allow investors to resell the common
    stock in public markets.

 

    On September 30, 2004, we issued 1.3 million shares of
    common stock to Jens Mortensen, a director, in exchange for his
    19% interest in Tubular. As a result of this transaction, we own
    100% of Tubular. The total value of the consideration paid to
    Jens was $6.4 million, which was equal to the number of
    shares of common stock issued to Mr. Mortensen multiplied
    by the last sale price ($4.95) of the common stock as reported
    on the American Stock Exchange on the date of issuance. This
    amount was treated as a contribution to stockholders equity.

 

    On December 10, 2004, we acquired Downhole for
    approximately $1.1 million in cash, 568,466 shares of
    our common stock and payment or assumption of $950,000 of debt.
    Approximately $2.2 million, the value of



    78



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    the common stock issued to Downhole’s sellers based on the
    closing price of our common stock issued at the date of the
    acquisition, was added to stockholders’ equity.

 

    As of January 1, 2005, in relation to the acquisition of
    Downhole, we executed a business development agreement with CTTV
    Investments LLC, an affiliate of ChevronTexaco Inc., whereby we
    issued 20,000 shares of our common stock to CTTV and
    further agreed to issue up to an additional 60,000 shares
    to CTTV contingent upon our subsidiaries receiving certain
    levels of revenues in 2005 from ChevronTexaco and its
    affiliates. CTTV was a minority owner of Downhole, which we
    acquired in 2004. Based on the terms of the agreement, no
    additional shares were issued in 2006 or 2005.

 

    On April 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock
    of Delta, for $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of
    our common stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000.
    Approximately $1.0 million, the value of the common stock
    issued to Delta’s sellers based on the closing price of our
    common stock issued at the date of the acquisition, was added to
    stockholders’ equity.

 

    On May 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital
    stock of Capcoil for $2.7 million in cash,
    168,161 shares of our common stock and the payment or
    assumption of approximately $1.3 million of debt.
    Approximately $750,000, the value of the common stock issued to
    Capcoil’s sellers based on the closing price of our common
    stock issued at the date of the acquisition, was added to
    stockholders’ equity.

 

    In August 2005, our stockholders approved an amendment to our
    certificate of incorporation to increase the authorized number
    of shares of our common stock from 20 million to
    100 million and to increase our authorized preferred stock
    from 10 million shares to 25 million shares and, we
    completed a secondary public offering in which we sold
    1,761,034 shares for approximately $15.5 million, net
    of expenses.

 

    We also had options and warrants exercised during 2005. Those
    exercises resulted in 1,076,154 shares of our common stock
    being issued for $1.4 million.

 

    We issued 125,285, 2.5 million, 246,761 and
    3.2 million shares of our common stock in relation to the
    Rogers, DLS, Petro Rental and OGR acquisition, respectively (see
    Note 4).

 

    On August 14, 2006 we closed on a public offering of
    3,450,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering
    price of $14.50 per share. Net proceeds from the public
    offering of $46.3 million were used to fund a portion of
    our acquisition of DLS.

 

    We also had options and warrants exercised in 2006, which
    resulted in 1,851,377 shares of our common stock being
    issued for approximately $6.3 million. We recognized
    approximately $3.4 million of compensation expense related
    to stock options in 2006 that was recorded as capital in excess
    of par value (see Note 1). We also recorded approximately
    $6.4 million of tax benefit related to our stock
    compensation plans.

 

NOTE 11 —
    REVERSE STOCK SPLIT

 

    We effected a reverse stock split on June 10, 2004. As a
    result of the reverse stock split, every five shares of our
    common stock was combined into one share of common stock. The
    reverse stock split reduced the number of shares of outstanding
    common stock from 31,393,789 to approximately 6,265,000 and
    reduced the number of our stockholders from 6,070 to
    approximately 2,140. All share and related amounts presented
    have been retroactively adjusted for the stock split.

 

NOTE 12 —
    STOCK OPTIONS

 

    In 2000, we issued stock options and promissory notes to certain
    current and former directors as compensation for services as
    directors (See Note 8), and our Board of Directors granted
    stock options to these same individuals. Options to purchase
    4,800 shares of our common stock were granted with an
    exercise price of $13.75 per share. These options vested
    immediately and may be exercised any time prior to
    March 28,



    79



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    2010. As of December 31, 2006 4,000 of the stock options
    remain outstanding. No compensation expense has been recorded
    for these options that were issued with an exercise price equal
    to the fair value of the common stock at the date of grant.

 

    On May 31, 2001, the Board granted to Leonard Toboroff, one
    of our directors, an option to purchase 100,000 shares of
    our common stock at $2.50 per share, exercisable for
    10 years from October 15, 2001. The option was granted
    for services provided by Mr. Toboroff to OilQuip prior to
    the merger, including providing financial advisory services,
    assisting in OilQuip’s capital structure and assisting
    OilQuip in finding strategic acquisition opportunities. We
    recorded compensation expense of $500,000 for the issuance of
    the option for the year ended December 31, 2001. As of
    December 31, 2006, all of the stock options have been
    exercised.

 

    The 2003 Incentive Stock Plan (“2003 Plan”), as
    amended, permits us to grant to our key employees and outside
    directors various forms of stock incentives, including, among
    others, incentive and non-qualified stock options and restricted
    stock. The 2003 Plan is administered by the Compensation
    Committee of the Board, which consists of two or more directors
    appointed by the Board. The following benefits may be granted
    under the 2003 Plan: (a) stock appreciation rights;
    (b) restricted stock; (c) performance awards;
    (d) incentive stock options; (e) nonqualified stock
    options; and (f) other stock-based awards. Stock incentive
    terms are not to be in excess of ten years. The maximum number
    of shares that may be issued under the 2003 Plan shall be the
    lesser of 3,000,000 shares and 15% of the total number of
    shares of common stock outstanding.

 

    The 2006 Incentive Plan (“2006 Plan”), was approved by
    our stockholders in November 2006. The 2006 Plan is administered
    by the Compensation Committee of the Board, which consists of
    two or more directors appointed by the Board. The maximum number
    of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value
    $0.01 per share (“Common Stock”), that may be
    issued under the 2006 Plan is equal to 1,500,000 shares,
    subject to adjustment in the event of stock splits and certain
    other corporate events. The 2006 Plan provides for the grant of
    any or all of the following types of awards: (i) stock
    options, including incentive stock options and non-qualified
    stock options; (ii) bonus stock; (iii) restricted
    stock awards; (iv) performance awards; and (v) other
    stock-based awards. Except with respect to awards of incentive
    stock options, all employees, consultants and non-employee
    directors of the Company and its affiliates are eligible to
    participate in the 2006 Plan. The term of each Award shall be
    for such period as may be determined by the Committee; provided,
    that in no event shall the term of any Award exceed a period of
    ten (10) years from the date of its grant.

 

    A summary of our stock option activity and related information
    is as follows:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


December 31, 2006


 


 


December 31, 2005


 


 


December 31, 2004


 




 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Avg.



 




 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 




 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 



 





Beginning balance
    



 


 


    2,860,867


 


 


    $


    5.10


 


 


 


    1,215,000


 


 


    $


    3.20


 


 


 


    973,300


 


 


    $


    2.78


 





Granted
    



 


 


    15,000


 


 


 


    14.74


 


 


 


    1,695,000


 


 


 


    6.44


 


 


 


    248,000


 


 


 


    4.85


 





Canceled
    



 


 


    (54,567


    )


 


 


    5.97


 


 


 


    (15,300


    )


 


 


    3.33


 


 


 


    (6,300


    )


 


 


    2.78


 





Exercised
    



 


 


    (1,470,935


    )


 


 


    3.54


 


 


 


    (33,833


    )


 


 


    2.80


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Ending balance
    



 


 


    1,350,365


 


 


    $


    6.88


 


 


 


    2,860,867


 


 


    $


    5.10


 


 


 


    1,215,000


 


 


    $


    3.20


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    80



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



    The following table summarizes additional information about our
    stock options outstanding as of December 31, 2006:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted Average



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


Shares Under



 


 


Remaining



 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Exercise Price



 


 



Option



 


 



Contractual Life



 


 



Options Exercisable



 


 



Exercise Price



 



 




    $


    2.75


 


 


 


    56,300


 


 


 


    6.96 years


 


 


 


    56,300


 


 


    $


    2.75


 




    $


    3.86


 


 


 


    429,900


 


 


 


    8.09 years


 


 


 


    129,899


 


 


    $


    3.86


 




    $


    4.85


 


 


 


    227,000


 


 


 


    7.87 years


 


 


 


    227,000


 


 


    $


    4.85


 




    $


    4.87


 


 


 


    101,165


 


 


 


    8.40 years


 


 


 


    62,822


 


 


    $


    4.87


 




    $


    10.85


 


 


 


    517,667


 


 


 


    8.96 years


 


 


 


    325,988


 


 


    $


    10.85


 




    $


    13.75


 


 


 


    4,000


 


 


 


    3.24 years


 


 


 


    4,000


 


 


    $


    13.75


 




    $


    14.74


 


 


 


    14,333


 


 


 


    9.57 years


 


 


 


    4,336


 


 


    $


    14.74


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




    $


    6.88


 


 


 


    1,350,365


 


 


 


    8.36 years


 


 


 


    810,345


 


 


    $


    7.06


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    As of December 31, 2006, there was $914,000 of total
    unrecognized compensation cost related to stock option, with
    $900,000 to be recognized during the year ended
    December 31, 2007 and the remaining portion during the year
    ended December 31, 2008.

 

Restricted
    Stock Awards

 

    In addition to stock options, our 2003 and 2006 Plan allow for
    the grant of restricted stock awards (“RSA”), which is
    an award of common stock with no exercise price, where each unit
    represents the right to receive at the end of a stipulated
    period one unrestricted share of stock with no exercise price.
    The RSA restrictions lapse periodically over an extended period
    of time not exceeding 10 years. We determine the fair value
    of RSAs based on the market price of our common stock on the
    date of grant. Compensation cost for RSAs is primarily
    recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting or service
    period and is net of forfeitures.

 

    The following table summarizes activity in our nonvested
    restricted stock awards:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


 


Weighted Average



 




 


 


 


 


 


Grant-Date Fair Value



 




 


 


Number of Shares


 


 


per Share


 



 





Nonvested at December 31, 2005
    



 


 


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 





Granted
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Vested
    



 


 


    27,000


 


 


 


    18.30


 





Forfeited
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Nonvested at December 31, 2006
    



 


 


    27,000


 


 


    $


    18.30


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    As of December 31, 2006, there was $393,000 of total
    unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested RSAs, which
    is expected to be recognized during the year ended
    December 31, 2007.

 

NOTE 13 —
    STOCK PURCHASE WARRANTS

 

    In conjunction with the Mountain Air purchase by OilQuip in
    February of 2001, Mountain Air issued a common stock warrant for
    620,000 shares to a third-party investment firm that
    assisted us in its initial identification and purchase of the
    Mountain Air assets. The warrant entitles the holder to acquire
    up to 620,000 shares of common stock of Mountain Air at an
    exercise price of $.01 per share over a nine-year period
    commencing on February 7, 2001.



    81



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    We issued two warrants (“Warrants A and B”) for the
    purchase of 233,000 total shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $0.75 per share and one warrant for the
    purchase of 67,000 shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $5.00 per share (“Warrant C”)
    in connection with our subordinated debt financing for Mountain
    Air in 2001. Warrants A and B were paid off on December 7,
    2004. Warrant C was exercised during November 2006.

 

    On February 6, 2002, in connection with the acquisition of
    substantially all of the outstanding stock of Strata, we issued
    a warrant for the purchase of 87,500 shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share over the term
    of four years. The warrants were exercised in August of 2005.

 

    In connection with the Strata Acquisition, on February 19,
    2003, we issued Energy Spectrum an additional warrant to
    purchase 175,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise
    price of $0.75 per share. The warrants were exercised in
    August of 2005.

 

    In March 2004, we issued a warrant to purchase
    340,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $2.50 per share to Morgan Joseph & Co., in
    consideration of financial advisory services to be provided by
    Morgan Joseph pursuant to a consulting agreement. The warrants
    were exercised in August 2005.

 

    In April 2004, we issued warrants to purchase 20,000 shares
    of common stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share to
    Wells Fargo Credit, Inc., in connection with the extension of
    credit by Wells Fargo Credit Inc. The warrants were exercised in
    August 2005.

 

    In April 2004, we completed a private placement of
    620,000 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of common stock to the following investors:
    Christopher Engel; Donald Engel; the Engel Defined Benefit Plan;
    RER Corp., a corporation wholly-owned by director Robert
    Nederlander; and Leonard Toboroff, a director. The investors
    invested $1,550,000 in exchange for 620,000 shares of
    common stock for a purchase price equal to $2.50 per share,
    and invested $450,000 in exchange for warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of common stock at an exercise of
    $2.50 per share, expiring on April 1, 2006. A total of
    486,557 of these warrants were exercised in 2005 with the
    remaining portion exercised during 2006.

 

    In May 2004, we issued a warrant to purchase 3,000 shares
    of our common stock at an exercise price of $4.75 per share
    to Jeffrey R. Freedman in consideration of financial advisory
    services to be provided by Mr. Freedman pursuant to a
    consulting agreement. The warrants were exercised in May 2004.
    Mr. Freedman was also granted 16,000 warrants in May of
    2004 exercisable at $4.65 per share. These warrants were
    exercised in November of 2005.

 

    Warrants for 4,000 shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $4.65 were also issued in May 2004 and remain
    outstanding as of December 31, 2006.

 

NOTE 14 —
    CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL INFORMATION

 

    Set forth on the following pages are the condensed consolidating
    financial statements of (i) Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    (ii) its subsidiaries that are guarantors of the senior
    notes and revolving credit facility and (iii) the
    subsidiaries that are not guarantors of the senior notes and
    revolving credit facility (in thousands). Prior to the
    acquisition of DLS, all of our subsidiaries were guarantors of
    our senior notes and revolving credit facility, the parent
    company had no independent assets or operations, the guarantees
    were full and unconditional and joint and several.



    82



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING BALANCE SHEETS
    December 31, 2006

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Allis-Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Assets



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash and cash equivalents
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    37,769


 


 


    $


    1,976


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    39,745


 





Trade receivables, net
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    62,089


 


 


 


    33,971


 


 


 


    (294


    )


 


 


    95,766


 





Inventories
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    13,194


 


 


 


    15,421


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    28,615


 





Intercompany receivables
    



 


 


    67,909


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (67,909


    )


 


 


    —


 





Note receivable from affiliate
    



 


 


    5,502


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (5,502


    )


 


 


    —


 





Prepaid expenses and other
    



 


 


    5,703


 


 


 


    10,200


 


 


 


    733


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,636


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current assets
    



 


 


    79,114


 


 


 


    123,252


 


 


 


    52,101


 


 


 


    (73,705


    )


 


 


    180,762


 





Property and equipment, net
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    422,297


 


 


 


    131,961


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    554,258


 





Goodwill
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    124,331


 


 


 


    1,504


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    125,835


 





Other intangible assets, net
    



 


 


    598


 


 


 


    32,153


 


 


 


    89


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    32,840


 





Debt issuance costs, net
    



 


 


    9,633


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    9,633


 





Note receivable from affiliates
    



 


 


    12,339


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (12,339


    )


 


 


    —


 





Investments in affiliates
    



 


 


    722,202


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (722,202


    )


 


 


    —


 





Other assets
    



 


 


    257


 


 


 


    4,719


 


 


 


    22


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,998


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total assets
    



 


    $


    824,143


 


 


    $


    706,752


 


 


    $


    185,677


 


 


    $


    (808,246


    )


 


    $


    908,326


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Liabilities and
    Stockholders’ Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Current maturities of long-term
    debt
    



 


    $


    32


 


 


    $


    3,809


 


 


    $


    3,158


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    6,999


 





Trade accounts payable
    



 


 


    31


 


 


 


    13,510


 


 


 


    12,125


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    25,666


 





Accrued salaries, benefits and
    payroll taxes
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,993


 


 


 


    7,895


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    10,888


 





Accrued interest
    



 


 


    11,755


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    112


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    11,867


 





Accrued expenses
    



 


 


    135


 


 


 


    9,247


 


 


 


    7,863


 


 


 


    (294


    )


 


 


    16,951


 





Intercompany payables
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    425,610


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    (425,627


    )


 


 


    —


 





Note payable to affiliate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    5,502


 


 


 


    (5,502


    )


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total current liabilities
    



 


 


    11,953


 


 


 


    455,169


 


 


 


    36,672


 


 


 


    (431,423


    )


 


 


    72,371


 





Long-term debt, net of current
    maturities
    



 


 


    555,750


 


 


 


    770


 


 


 


    4,926


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    561,446


 





Note payable to affiliate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    12,339


 


 


 


    (12,339


    )


 


 


    —


 





Deferred income tax liability
    



 


 


    2,203


 


 


 


    10,714


 


 


 


    7,036


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    19,953


 





Other long-term liabilities
    



 


 


    304


 


 


 


    319


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    623


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities
    



 


 


    570,210


 


 


 


    466,972


 


 


 


    60,973


 


 


 


    (443,762


    )


 


 


    654,393


 





Commitments and contingencies
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    83



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Allis-Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Stockholders’ Equity
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Common stock
    



 


 


    282


 


 


 


    3,526


 


 


 


    42,963


 


 


 


    (46,489


    )


 


 


    282


 





Capital in excess of par value
    



 


 


    216,208


 


 


 


    167,508


 


 


 


    74,969


 


 


 


    (242,477


    )


 


 


    216,208


 





Retained earnings
    



 


 


    37,443


 


 


 


    68,746


 


 


 


    6,772


 


 


 


    (75,518


    )


 


 


    37,443


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total stockholders’ equity
    



 


 


    253,933


 


 


 


    239,780


 


 


 


    124,704


 


 


 


    (364,484


    )


 


 


    253,933


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total liabilities and stock
    holders’ equity
    



 


    $


    824,143


 


 


    $


    706,752


 


 


    $


    185,677


 


 


    $


    (808,246


    )


 


    $


    908,326


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING INCOME STATEMENTS
    For the Year Ended December 31, 2006

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Allis-Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    237,814


 


 


    $


    69,490


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    307,304


 





Cost of revenues
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Direct costs
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    130,978


 


 


 


    50,941


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    181,919


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,198


 


 


 


    4,063


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    20,261


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total cost of revenues
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    147,176


 


 


 


    55,004


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    202,180


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Gross margin
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    90,638


 


 


 


    14,486


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    105,124


 





General and administrative
    



 


 


    2,643


 


 


 


    30,651


 


 


 


    2,242


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    35,536


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    1,120


 


 


 


    1,801


 


 


 


    11


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,932


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income from operations
    



 


 


    (3,763


    )


 


 


    58,186


 


 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    66,656


 





Other income (expense):
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Equity earnings in affiliates, net
    of tax
    



 


 


    58,077


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    —


 





Interest, net
    



 


 


    (18,733


    )


 


 


    67


 


 


 


    (597


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (19,263


    )





Other
    



 


 


    45


 


 


 


    97


 


 


 


    (489


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (347


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total other income (expense)
    



 


 


    39,389


 


 


 


    164


 


 


 


    (1,086


    )


 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    (19,610


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income before income taxes
    



 


 


    35,626


 


 


 


    58,350


 


 


 


    11,147


 


 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    47,046


 





Provision for income taxes
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (7,045


    )


 


 


    (4,375


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (11,420


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    51,305


 


 


    $


    6,772


 


 


    $


    (58,077


    )


 


    $


    35,626


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






    84



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOW
    For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 (unaudited)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


Other



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiaries



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


(Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors)


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Cash Flows from Operating
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    51,305


 


 


    $


    6,772


 


 


    $


    (58,077


    )


 


    $


    35,626


 





Adjustments to reconcile net
    income to net cash provided by operating activities:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,198


 


 


 


    4,063


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    20,261


 





Amortization
    



 


 


    1,121


 


 


 


    1,811


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,932


 





Write-off of deferred financing
    fees
    



 


 


    453


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    453


 





Stock based compensation
    



 


 


    3,394


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,394


 





Provision for bad debts
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    781


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    781


 





Imputed interest
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    355


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    355


 





Equity earnings in affiliates
    



 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    58,077


 


 


 


    —


 





Deferred taxes
    



 


 


    (619


    )


 


 


    247


 


 


 


    2,587


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,215


 





(Gain) on sale of equipment
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,428


    )


 


 


    (16


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,444


    )





Changes in operating assets and
    liabilities, net of acquisitions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





(Increase) in accounts receivables
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (23,144


    )


 


 


    (31


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (23,175


    )





(Increase) decrease in other
    current assets
    



 


 


    (2,483


    )


 


 


    1,121


 


 


 


    1,230


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (132


    )





(Increase) decrease in other assets
    



 


 


    296


 


 


 


    101


 


 


 


    (89


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    308


 





(Decrease) increase in accounts
    payable
    



 


 


    (82


    )


 


 


    3,587


 


 


 


    (5,842


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,337


    )





(Decrease) increase in accrued
    interest
    



 


 


    11,508


 


 


 


    (45


    )


 


 


    (81


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    11,382


 





(Decrease) increase in accrued
    expenses
    



 


 


    (390


    )


 


 


    1,633


 


 


 


    (371


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    872


 





(Decrease) increase in accrued
    salaries, benefits and payroll taxes
    



 


 


    (1,951


    )


 


 


    2,780


 


 


 


    2,563


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,392


 





(Decrease) increase in other
    liabilities
    



 


 


    (31


    )


 


 


    (193


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (224


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided (used) by
    operating activities
    



 


 


    (11,235


    )


 


 


    54,109


 


 


 


    10,785


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    53,659


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Investing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisition of businesses, net of
    cash
    



 


 


    (528,167


    )


 


 


    3,649


 


 


 


    (2,054


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (526,572


    )





Notes receivable from affiliates
    



 


 


    (585


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    585


 


 


 


    —


 





    85



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


Other



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiaries



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


(Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors)


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Purchase of property and equipment
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (33,930


    )


 


 


    (5,767


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (39,697


    )





Proceeds from sale of equipment
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,730


 


 


 


    151


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,881


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided (used) in
    investing activities
    



 


 


    (528,752


    )


 


 


    (23,551


    )


 


 


    (7,670


    )


 


 


    585


 


 


 


    (559,388


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Financing
    Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Proceeds from long-term debt
    



 


 


    555,000


 


 


 


    2,820


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    557,820


 





Payments on long-term debt
    



 


 


    (42,414


    )


 


 


    (9,875


    )


 


 


    (1,741


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (54,030


    )





Payments on related party debt
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,031


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,031


    )





Net (payments) borrowings on lines
    of credit
    



 


 


    (6,400


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (6,400


    )





Accounts receivable from affiliates
    



 


 


    (16,444


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,444


 


 


 


    —


 





Accounts payable to affiliates
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,427


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    (16,444


    )


 


 


    —


 





Note payable to affiliate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    585


 


 


 


    (585


    )


 


 


    —


 





Proceeds from issuance of common
    stock
    



 


 


    46,297


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    46,297


 





Proceeds from exercise of options
    and warrants
    



 


 


    6,321


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,321


 





Tax benefit on options
    



 


 


    6,440


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,440


 





Debt issuance costs
    



 


 


    (9,863


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (9,863


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net cash provided (used) by
    financing activities
    



 


 


    538,937


 


 


 


    6,341


 


 


 


    (1,139


    )


 


 


    (585


    )


 


 


    543,554


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Net change in cash and cash
    equivalents
    



 


 


    (1,050


    )


 


 


    36,899


 


 


 


    1,976


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    37,825


 





Cash and cash equivalents at
    beginning of year
    



 


 


    1,050


 


 


 


    870


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,920


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash and cash equivalents at end
    of period
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    37,769


 


 


    $


    1,976


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    39,745


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 15 — 


RELATED
    PARTY TRANSACTIONS



 

    In July 2005, we entered into a lease of a yard in Buffalo,
    Texas which is part owned by our former Chief Operating Officer,
    David Wilde. The monthly rent was $3,500.

 

    Until December 2004, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman,
    Munawar H. Hidayatallah and his wife were personal guarantors of
    substantially all of the financing extended to us by commercial
    banks. In December 2004, we refinanced most of our outstanding
    bank debt and obtained the release of certain guarantees. After
    the refinancing, Mr. Hidayatallah continued to guarantee
    the Tubular $4.0 million subordinated seller note until
    July 2005. We paid Mr. Hidayatallah an annual guarantee fee
    equal to one-quarter of one percent of the total amount of the
    debt guaranteed by Mr. Hidayatallah. These fees aggregated
    to $7,250 during 2005 and were paid quarterly, in arrears, based
    upon the average amount of debt outstanding in the prior quarter.


    86



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In April 2004, we entered into an oral consulting agreement with
    Leonard Toboroff, one of our directors, pursuant to which we pay
    him $12,000 per month in 2006 and $10,000 per month in
    2005 to advise us regarding financing and acquisition
    opportunities.

 

    Jens Mortensen, one of our former directors, is the former owner
    of Tubular and held a 19% minority interest in Tubular until
    September 30, 2004. He was also the holder of a
    $4.0 million subordinated note payable issued by Tubular
    and at December 31, 2005 was owed $60,000 in accrued
    interest and $267,000 related to a non-compete agreement. (See
    Note 8). The subordinated note was repaid in January of
    2006 and the accrued interest was paid in January 2006.
    Mr. Mortensen, formerly the sole proprietor of Tubular,
    owns a shop yard which he leases to Jens’ on a monthly
    basis. Lease payments made under the terms of the lease were $0,
    $16,800 and $28,800 for the years ended December 31, 2006,
    2005 and 2004, respectively. In addition, Mr. Mortensen and
    members of his family own 100% of Tex-Mex Rental &
    Supply Co., a Texas corporation, that sold approximately $0, $0
    and $167,000 of equipment and other supplies to Tubular for the
    years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.

 

    DLS was acquired from three British Virgin Island corporations.
    Two of our Directors; Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A.
    Bulgheroni, indirectly beneficially own substantially all of the
    shares of the DLS sellers. DLS’ largest customer is Pan
    American Energy which is a joint venture by British Petroleum
    and Bridas Corporation. Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A.
    Bulgheroni, indirectly beneficially own substantially all of the
    shares of the Bridas Corporation.

 

    As described in Note 8, several of our former directors
    were issued promissory notes in 2000 in lieu of compensation for
    services. Our current maturities of long-term debt includes
    $32,000 and $96,000 as of December 31, 2006 and 2005,
    respectively, relative to these notes.

 







NOTE 16 — 


SEGMENT
    INFORMATION



 

    At December 31, 2006, we had six operating segments
    including: Rental Tools, International Drilling, Directional
    Drilling Services, Casing and Tubing Services, Compressed Air
    Drilling Services and Production Services. All of the segments
    provide services to the energy industry. The revenues, operating
    income (loss), depreciation and amortization, capital
    expenditures and assets of each of the reporting segments plus
    the Corporate function are reported below (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Revenues:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    51,521


 


 


    $


    5,059


 


 


    $


    611


 





International drilling
    



 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    72,811


 


 


 


    43,901


 


 


 


    24,787


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    50,887


 


 


 


    20,932


 


 


 


    10,391


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    43,045


 


 


 


    25,662


 


 


 


    11,561


 





Production services
    



 


 


    19,550


 


 


 


    9,790


 


 


 


    376


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total revenues
    



 


    $


    307,304


 


 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    87



Table of Contents


ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Operating Income
    (Loss):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    26,293


 


 


    $


    1,300


 


 


    $


    (71


    )





International drilling
    



 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    17,666


 


 


 


    7,389


 


 


 


    3,061


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    12,544


 


 


 


    4,994


 


 


 


    3,217


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    10,810


 


 


 


    5,612


 


 


 


    1,169


 





Production services
    



 


 


    2,137


 


 


 


    (99


    )


 


 


    4


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    (15,027


    )


 


 


    (5,978


    )


 


 


    (3,153


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total income from operations
    



 


    $


    66,656


 


 


    $


    13,218


 


 


    $


    4,227


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation and Amortization
    Expense:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    7,268


 


 


    $


    492


 


 


    $


    40


 





International drilling
    



 


 


    4,074


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    1,464


 


 


 


    887


 


 


 


    466


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    3,908


 


 


 


    2,006


 


 


 


    1,597


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    3,057


 


 


 


    1,946


 


 


 


    1,329


 





Production services
    



 


 


    2,005


 


 


 


    912


 


 


 


    26


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    1,417


 


 


 


    418


 


 


 


    120


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total depreciation and
    amortization expense
    



 


    $


    23,193


 


 


    $


    6,661


 


 


    $


    3,578


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Capital Expenditures:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    4,538


 


 


    $


    435


 


 


    $


    232


 





International drilling
    



 


 


    5,770


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    5,128


 


 


 


    2,922


 


 


 


    1,552


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    10,980


 


 


 


    5,207


 


 


 


    1,285


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    7,716


 


 


 


    7,008


 


 


 


    1,399


 





Production services
    



 


 


    5,253


 


 


 


    1,514


 


 


 


    106


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    312


 


 


 


    681


 


 


 


    29


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total capital expenditures
    



 


    $


    39,697


 


 


    $


    17,767


 


 


    $


    4,603


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Goodwill:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    106,132


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 





International drilling
    



 


 


    1,504


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    4,168


 


 


 


    4,168


 


 


 


    4,168


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    6,464


 


 


 


    3,673


 


 


 


    3,673


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    3,950


 


 


 


    3,950


 


 


 


    3,510


 





Production services
    



 


 


    3,617


 


 


 


    626


 


 


 


    425


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total goodwill
    



 


    $


    125,835


 


 


    $


    12,417


 


 


    $


    11,776


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






    88



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)





  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


As of December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Assets:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Rental tools
    



 


    $


    453,802


 


 


    $


    8,034


 


 


    $


    1,291


 





International drilling
    



 


 


    185,677


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Directional drilling services
    



 


 


    28,585


 


 


 


    20,960


 


 


 


    14,166


 





Casing and tubing services
    



 


 


    74,372


 


 


 


    45,351


 


 


 


    21,197


 





Compressed air drilling services
    



 


 


    54,288


 


 


 


    46,045


 


 


 


    29,147


 





Production services
    



 


 


    57,954


 


 


 


    12,282


 


 


 


    5,806


 





General corporate
    



 


 


    53,648


 


 


 


    4,683


 


 


 


    8,585


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total assets
    



 


    $


    908,326


 


 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Revenues:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





United States
    



 


    $


    228,192


 


 


    $


    98,583


 


 


    $


    42,466


 





International
    



 


 


    79,112


 


 


 


    6,761


 


 


 


    5,260


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total revenues
    



 


    $


    307,304


 


 


    $


    105,344


 


 


    $


    47,726


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


As of  December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 



 





Long Lived Assets:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





United States
    



 


    $


    574,302


 


 


    $


    97,390


 


 


    $


    55,340


 





International
    



 


 


    153,262


 


 


 


    4,313


 


 


 


    474


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Total long lived assets
    



 


    $


    727,564


 


 


    $


    101,703


 


 


    $


    55,814


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    89



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)



NOTE 17 —
    SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOWS INFORMATION (in thousands)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(Restated)


 



 





Interest paid
    



 


    $


    8,571


 


 


    $


    3,924


 


 


    $


    2,159


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income taxes paid
    



 


    $


    5,796


 


 


    $


    676


 


 


    $


    514


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Other non-cash investing and
    financing transactions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Insurance premiums financed
    



 


 


    2,871


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Purchase of equipment financed
    through assumption of debt or accounts payable
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    592


 


 


 


    —


 





Non-cash investing and
    financing transactions in connection with
    acquisitions:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Fair value of net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    (4,867


    )





Goodwill and other intangibles
    



 


 


    (4,010


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,839


    )





Value of common stock, issued
    



 


 


    94,980


 


 


 


    1,750


 


 


 


    2,177


 





Seller financed note
    



 


 


    750


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Deferred tax liability
    



 


 


    17,662


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Accrued expenses
    



 


 


    250


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Value of minority interest
    contribution
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,070


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    109,632


 


 


    $


    1,750


 


 


    $


    (4,459


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Acquisition of the remaining
    19% of Jens:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Fair value of net assets acquired
    



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    (813


    )





Goodwill and other intangibles
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,676


    )





Value of common stock issued
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,434


 





Value of minority interest
    retirement
    



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (1,945


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

NOTE 18 —
    LEGAL MATTERS

 

    We are named from time to time in legal proceedings related to
    our activities prior to our bankruptcy in 1988; however, we
    believe that we were discharged from liability for all such
    claims in the bankruptcy and believe the likelihood of a
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.

 

    We are involved in various other legal proceedings in the
    ordinary course of business. The legal proceedings are at
    different stages; however, we believe that the likelihood of
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.

 

NOTE 19 —
    SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

 

    In January 2007, we closed on a private offering, to qualified
    institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the
    Securities Act, of $255.0 million principal amount of our
    8.5% senior notes due 2017. The proceeds of the senior
    notes offering, together with a portion of the proceeds of our
    concurrent common stock offering, were used to repay the debt
    outstanding under our $300.0 million bridge loan facility,
    which we incurred to finance our acquisition of substantially
    all the assets of OGR.



    90



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.

 

Notes to Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)


 

    In January 2007, we closed on a public offering of
    6.0 million shares of our common stock at $17.65 per
    share. The proceeds of the common stock offering, together with
    the proceeds of our concurrent senior notes offering, were used
    to repay the debt outstanding under our $300.0 million
    bridge loan facility, which we incurred to finance our
    acquisition of substantially all the assets of OGR and for
    general corporate purposes.

 







NOTE 20 —
    


SUMMARIZED
    QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED) (in thousands, except per
    share amounts)



 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


First



 


 


Second



 


 


Third



 


 


Fourth



 




 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 



 





Year 2006



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    47,028


 


 


    $


    60,470


 


 


    $


    85,738


 


 


    $


    114,068


 





Operating income
    



 


 


    8,633


 


 


 


    15,871


 


 


 


    19,054


 


 


 


    23,098


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    4,423


 


 


    $


    9,594


 


 


    $


    11,252


 


 


    $


    10,356


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.26


 


 


    $


    0.53


 


 


    $


    0.52


 


 


    $


    0.41


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.23


 


 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    0.40


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


First



 


 


Second



 


 


Third



 


 


Fourth



 




 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 




 


 


(Restated)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



 





Year 2005



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Revenues
    



 


    $


    19,334


 


 


    $


    23,588


 


 


    $


    28,908


 


 


    $


    33,514


 





Operating income
    



 


 


    2,247


 


 


 


    2,914


 


 


 


    3,524


 


 


 


    4,533


 





Net income
    



 


    $


    1,567


 


 


    $


    1,769


 


 


    $


    1,293


 


 


    $


    2,546


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Income per common share:
    



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Basic
    



 


    $


    0.12


 


 


    $


    0.13


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.15


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Diluted
    



 


    $


    0.11


 


 


    $


    0.12


 


 


    $


    0.08


 


 


    $


    0.14


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    91



Table of Contents


 







ITEM 9.  


CHANGES
    AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL
    DISCLOSURE




 

    None.


 







ITEM 9A.  


CONTROLS
    AND PROCEDURES




 







(a) 


Evaluation
    Of Disclosure Controls And Procedures



 

    Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
    adequate internal control over financial reporting as that term
    is defined in Exchange Act
    Rule 13a-15(f).
    Our internal control over financial reporting is a process
    designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
    reliability of our financial reporting and the preparation of
    our financial statements for external purposes in accordance
    with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our
    control environment is the foundation for our system of internal
    control over financial reporting and is an integral part of our
    Code of Ethics for the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial
    Officer and Chief Accounting Officer, which sets the tone of our
    company. Our internal control over financial reporting includes
    those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the
    maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
    and fairly reflect our transactions and dispositions of our
    assets; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
    are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of our financial
    statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
    principles, and that our receipts and expenditures are being
    made only in accordance with authorizations of our management
    and directors; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance
    regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
    acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a
    material effect on our financial statements. Our evaluation did
    not include companies which were acquired during fiscal year
    2006, except for Specialty Rental Tools, Inc., since, under SEC
    guidelines, acquisitions do not have to evaluated until twelve
    months after the acquisition date.

 

    In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our internal control
    over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006, as
    required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,
    our management conducted an assessment, including testing, based
    on the criteria set forth in Internal Control —
    Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
    Organizations of the Treadway Commission (the “COSO
    Framework”). Because of its inherent limitations, internal
    control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
    misstatements. In addition, projections of any evaluation of
    effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
    controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions
    or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
    may deteriorate.

 

    Under the supervision and with the participation of our
    management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief
    Financial Officer, we conducted an evaluation of the
    effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
    and, based on that assessment, and concluded that, as of
    December 31, 2006, our internal controls over financial
    reporting are effective based on these criteria.

 







(b) 


Change in
    Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.



 

    During the most recent fiscal quarter, there have been no
    changes in our internal control over financial reporting that
    have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
    affect, our internal control over financial reporting.

 

Management
    Report on Internal Control Over Financial
    Reporting.

 

    Our Management Report on Internal Controls Over Financial
    Reporting can be found in Item 8 of this report. UHY LLP,
    the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm’s
    attestation report on management’s assessment of the
    effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
    can also be found in Item 8 of this report.


 







ITEM 9B.  


OTHER
    INFORMATION




 

    None.



    92



Table of Contents


 

PART III



 







ITEM 10.  


DIRECTORS
    AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT




 

    Pursuant to General Instructions G(3), information on
    directors and executive officers of Allis-Chalmers will be filed
    in an amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from Allis-Chalmers’
    Definitive Proxy Statement for the 2007 annual meeting of
    stockholders within 120 days of the end of our fiscal year
    ending December 31, 2006.


 







ITEM 11.  


EXECUTIVE
    COMPENSATION




 

    Pursuant to General Instructions G(3), information on
    executive compensation will be filed in an amendment to this
    Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from Allis-Chalmers’
    Definitive Proxy Statement for the 2007 annual meeting of
    stockholders within 120 days of the end of our fiscal year
    ending December 31, 2006.


 







ITEM 12.  


SECURITY
    OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND
    MANAGEMENT




 

    Pursuant to General Instruction G(3), information on
    security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
    will be filed in an amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from Allis-Chalmers’
    Definitive Proxy Statement for the 2007 annual meeting of
    stockholders within 120 days of the end of our fiscal year
    ending December 31, 2006.


 







ITEM 13.  


CERTAIN
    RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS




 

    Pursuant to General Instruction G(3), information on
    security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
    will be filed in an amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from the Company’s Definitive
    Proxy Statement for the 2007 annual meeting of stockholders
    within 120 days of the end of our fiscal year ending
    December 31, 2006.


 







ITEM 14.  


PRINCIPAL
    ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES




 

    Pursuant to General Instruction G(3), information on
    principal accountant fees and services will be filed in an
    amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from the Company’s Definitive
    Proxy Statement for the 2007 annual meeting of stockholders
    within 120 days of the end of our fiscal year ending
    December 31, 2006.


 

PART IV



 







ITEM 15.  


EXHIBITS AND
    FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES




 

    (a)(1) Financial Statements

 

    All financial statements of the Registrant as set forth under
    Item 8 of this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K.

 

    (2) Financial Statement Schedules

 

    Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts

 

    (3) Exhibits

 

    The exhibits listed on the Exhibit index located on page 96
    of this Annual report are filed as part of this
    10-K.



    93



Table of Contents


(2) Financial
    Statement Schedule:

 

Schedule II —
    Valuation and Qualifying Accounts


 

Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc.



Valuation
    and Qualifying Accounts

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  



 


 


 


 


Additions



 


 


 


 




 


 


Balance at



 


Charged to



 


 


 


Balance at





 


 


Beginning



 


Costs and



 


 


 


End of






Description



 


of Period


 


Expense


 


Deductions


 


Period




 


 


(In thousands)



 





Year Ended December 31,
    2006:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Allowance for doubtful accounts
    



 


 


    383


 


 


 


    781


 


 


 


    (338


    )


 


 


    826


 





Deferred tax assets valuation
    allowance
    



 


 


    27,131


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (27,131


    )


 


 


    —


 





Year Ended December 31,
    2005:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Allowance for doubtful accounts
    



 


 


    265


 


 


 


    219


 


 


 


    (101


    )


 


 


    383


 





Deferred tax assets valuation
    allowance
    



 


 


    30,367


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,236


    )


 


 


    27,131


 





Year Ended December 31,
    2004:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Allowance for doubtful accounts
    



 


 


    168


 


 


 


    104


 


 


 


    (7


    )


 


 


    265


 





Deferred tax assets valuation
    allowance
    



 


 


    38,475


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,108


    )


 


 


    30,367


 







    94



Table of Contents


 

SIGNATURES


 

    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
    Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the registrant has
    duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
    undersigned, thereunto duly authorized on March 14, 2007.

 

/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH 



Munawar H. Hidayatallah


Chief Executive Officer and Chairman

 

    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
    Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has
    been signed on the date indicated by the following persons on
    behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  




Name



 



Title



 



Date




 




/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH
Munawar
    H. Hidayatallah
    


 


Chairman and Chief Executive
    Officer (Principle Executive Officer)
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ
Victor
    M. Perez
    


 


Chief Financial Officer
    (Principal Financial Officer)
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  BRUCE
    SAUERS
Bruce
    Sauers
    


 


Chief Accounting Officer
    (Principal Accounting Officer)
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  BURT
    A. ADAMS
Burt
    A. Adams
    


 


Vice Chairman, President and Chief
    Operating Officer
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  ALI
    H. M. AFDHAL
Ali
    H. M. Afdhal
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




    
Alejandro
    P. Bulgheroni
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




    
Carlos
    A. Bulgheroni
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JEFFREY
    R. FREEDMAN
Jeffrey
    R. Freedman
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  VICTOR
    F. GERMACK
Victor
    F. Germack
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JOHN
    E. MCCONNAUGHY,
    JR.
John
    E. McConnaughy, Jr.
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  ROBERT
    E. NEDERLANDER
Robert
    E. Nederlander
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  ZANE
    TANKEL
Zane
    Tankel
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  LEONARD
    TOBOROFF
Leonard
    Toboroff
    


 


Director
    


 


March 14, 2007
    







    95



Table of Contents


EXHIBIT INDEX

 



  
  
  
  
  




Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    2


    .1


 


First Amended Disclosure Statement
    pursuant to Section 1125 of the Bankruptcy Code, dated
    September 14, 1988, which includes the First Amended and
    Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated September 14,
    1988 (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    




 


    2


    .2


 


Reorganization
    Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and John T. Grigsby, Jr., Trustee
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit D of the First
    Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
    September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    




 


    2


    .3


 


Agreement and Plan of Merger dated
    as of May 9, 2001 by and among Registrant, Allis-Chalmers
    Acquisition Corp. and OilQuip Rentals, Inc. (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed May 15, 2001).
    




 


    2


    .4


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and between Registrant and Jens H.
    Mortensen, Jr. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).
    




 


    2


    .5


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and among Registrant, Energy Spectrum
    Partners LP, and Strata Directional Technology, Inc.
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.10 to the
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    




 


    2


    .6


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    August 10, 2004 by and among Allis-Chalmers Corporation and
    the investors named thereto (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.37 to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    




 


    2


    .7


 


Amendment to Stock Purchase
    Agreement dated August 10, 2004 (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.38 to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    




 


    2


    .8


 


Addendum to Stock Purchase
    Agreement dated September 24, 2004 (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.55 to Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 30, 2004).
    




 


    2


    .9


 


Asset Purchase Agreement dated
    November 10, 2004 by and among AirComp LLC, a Delaware
    limited liability company, Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc.,
    a Texas corporation, and Marquis Bit Co., L.L.C., a New Mexico
    limited liability company, Greg Hawley and Tammy Hawley,
    residents of Texas and Clay Wilson and Linda Wilson, residents
    of New Mexico (incorporated by reference to the Current Report
    on
    Form 8-K
    filed on November 15, 2004).
    




 


    2


    .10


 


Purchase Agreement and related
    Agreements by and among Allis-Chalmers Corporation, Chevron USA,
    Inc., Dale Redman and others dated December 10, 2004
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.63 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 16, 2004).
    




 


    2


    .11


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated
    April 1, 2005, by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    Thomas Whittington, Sr., Werlyn R. Bourgeois and SAM and D,
    LLC. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.51 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on April 5, 2005).
    




 


    2


    .12


 


Stock Purchase Agreement effective
    May 1, 2005, by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    Wesley J. Mahone, Mike T. Wilhite, Andrew D. Mills and Tim
    Williams (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.51 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 6, 2005).
    




 


    2


    .13


 


Purchase Agreement dated
    July 11, 2005 among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., Mountain
    Compressed Air, Inc. and M-I, L.L.C. (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.42 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 15, 2005).
    




 


    2


    .14


 


Asset Purchase Agreement dated
    July 11, 2005 between AirComp LLC, W.T. Enterprises, Inc.
    and William M. Watts (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.43 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 15, 2005).
    




 


    2


    .15


 


Asset Purchase Agreement by and
    between Patterson Services, Inc. and Allis-Chalmers Tubular
    Services, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.44
    to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 8, 2005).
    





    96



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  




Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    2


    .16


 


Stock Purchase Agreement dated as
    of December 20, 2005 between the Registrant and Joe Van
    Matre (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.33 to the
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2005).
    




 


    2


    .17


 


Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as
    of April 27, 2006, by and among Bridas International
    Holdings Ltd., Bridas Central Company Ltd., Associated Petroleum
    Investors Limited, and the Registrant. (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 2.3 to the Registrant’s Quarterly
    Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended March 31, 2006)
    




 


    2


    .18


 


Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as
    of October 17, 2006, by and between Allis-Chalmers
    Production Services, Inc. and Randolph J. Hebert (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 19, 2006).
    




 


    2


    .19


 


Asset Purchase Agreement, dated as
    of October 25, 2006, by and between Allis-Chalmers Energy
    Inc. and Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc. (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 26, 2006).
    




 


    3


    .1


 


Amended and Restated Certificate
    of Incorporation of Registrant (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    




 


    3


    .2


 


Certificate of Designation,
    Preferences and Rights of the Series A 10% Cumulative
    Convertible Preferred Stock ($.01 Par Value) of
    Registrant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).
    




 


    3


    .3


 


Amended and Restated By-laws of
    Registrant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.3. to
    the Registrant’s Annual Report of
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    




 


    3


    .4


 


Certificate of Amendment of
    Certificate of Incorporation filed with the Delaware Secretary
    of State on June 9, 2004 (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 3.3 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    




 


    3


    .5


 


Certificate of Amendment of
    Certificate of Incorporation filed with the Delaware Secretary
    of State on January 5, 2005 (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 3.5 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed January 11, 2005).
    




 


    3


    .6


 


Certificate of Amendment of
    Certificate of Incorporation filed with the Delaware Secretary
    of State on August 16, 2005 (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 3.5 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed August 17, 2005).
    




 


    4


    .1


 


Specimen Stock Certificate of
    Common Stock of Registrant (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    




 


    4


    .2


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated as of March 31, 1999, by and between Allis-Chalmers
    Corporation and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).
    




 


    4


    .3


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated April 2, 2004 by and between Registrant and the
    Stockholder signatories thereto (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.43 to Amendment No. 1 to the
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2003).
    




 


    4


    .4


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated as of January 29, 2007 by and among Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc., the Guarantors named therein and the Initial
    Purchasers named therein (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).
    




 


    4


    .5


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc., the Guarantors named therein and the Initial
    Purchasers named therein (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    




 


    4


    .6


 


Registration Rights Agreement
    dated as of August 14, 2006 by and among the Registrant,
    the guarantors listed on Schedule A thereto and RBC Capital
    Markets Corporation (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).
    




 


    4


    .7


 


Indenture dated as of
    January 18, 2006 by and among the Registrant, the
    Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    





    97



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  




Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    4


    .8


 


First Supplemental Indenture dated
    as of August 11, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers GP, LLC,
    Allis-Chalmers LP, LLC, Allis-Chalmers Management, LP, Rogers
    Oil Tool Services, Inc., the Registrant, the other Guarantors
    (as defined in the Indenture referred to therein) and Wells
    Fargo Bank, N.A (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2
    to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).
    




 


    4


    .9


 


Second Supplemental Indenture
    dated as of January 23, 2007 by and among Petro-Rentals,
    Incorporated, the Registrant, the other Guarantor parties
    thereto and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2007).
    




 


    4


    .10


 


Indenture, dated as of
    January 29, 2007, by and among the Registrant, the
    Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).
    




 


    4


    .11


 


Form of 9.0% Senior Note due
    2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit A to
    Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    




 


    4


    .12


 


Form of 8.5% Senior Note due
    2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit A to
    Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).
    




 


    9


    .1


 


Shareholders Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and among Registrant and the
    stockholder and warrant holder signatories thereto (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 2.12 to the Registrant’s
    Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    




 


    10


    .1


 


Amended and Restated Retiree
    Health Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and Wells Fargo Bank (incorporated by
    reference to
    Exhibit C-1
    of the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization
    dated September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    




 


    10


    .2


 


Amended and Restated Retiree
    Health Trust Agreement dated September 18, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and Firstar Trust Company (incorporated by
    reference to
    Exhibit C-2
    of the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization
    dated September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    




 


    10


    .3


 


Product Liability
    Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
    between Registrant and Bruce W. Strausberg, Trustee
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit E of the First
    Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
    September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).
    




 


    10


    .4*


 


Allis-Chalmers Savings Plan
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 1988).
    




 


    10


    .5*


 


Allis-Chalmers Consolidated
    Pension Plan (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 1988).
    




 


    10


    .6


 


Agreement dated as of
    March 31, 1999 by and between Registrant and the Pension
    Benefit Guaranty Corporation (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).
    




 


    10


    .7


 


Shareholders Agreement dated
    February 1, 2002 by and among Jens’ Oilfield Service,
    Inc., a Texas corporation, Jens H. Mortensen, Jr., and
    Registrant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.9 to the
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).
    




 


    10


    .8


 


Letter Agreement dated May 9,
    2001 by and between Registrant and the Pension Benefit Guarantee
    Corporation (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended March 31, 2002).
    




 


    10


    .9


 


Termination Agreement dated
    May 9, 2001 by and between Registrant, the Pension Benefit
    Guarantee Corporation and others (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 15, 2002).
    




 


    10


    .10*


 


Employment Agreement dated
    July 1, 2003 by and between AirComp LLC and Terry Keane
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed July 16, 2003).
    





    98



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  




Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    10


    .11*


 


Employment Agreement dated as of
    April 1, 2004 between Registrant and Munawar H.
    Hidayatallah (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.47 to
    the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    




 


    10


    .12*


 


Employment Agreement dated as of
    April 1, 2004 between Registrant and David Wilde
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.48 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    




 


    10


    .13*


 


Employment Agreement dated
    July 26, 2004 by and between the Registrant and Victor M.
    Perez (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.36 to the
    Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    




 


    10


    .14*


 


Employment Agreement dated
    October 11, 2004, between the Registrant and Theodore F.
    Pound III (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.60
    to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 15, 2004).
    




 


    10


    .15*


 


Employment Agreement, dated
    December 18, 2006, by and between the Registrant and Burt
    A. Adams (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 19, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .16


 


Fifth Amendment to Credit
    Agreement dated as of April 6, 2004 by and between Strata
    Directional Technology, Inc., and Wells Fargo Credit Inc.
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.53 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    




 


    10


    .17


 


Third Amendment to Credit
    Agreement dated as of April 6, 2004 by and between
    Jens’ Oilfield Service, Inc. and Wells Fargo Credit Inc.
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.54 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).
    




 


    10


    .18


 


Letter Agreement dated
    February 13, 2004 by and between Registrant and Morgan
    Joseph & Co., Inc. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.26 to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    




 


    10


    .19


 


Letter Agreement dated
    June 8, 2004 by and between the Registrant and Morgan
    Keegan & Company, Inc. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.35 to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    




 


    10


    .20


 


Letter Agreement relating to Stock
    Purchase Agreement dated August 5, 2004 (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.39 to the Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).
    




 


    10


    .21


 


Amended and Restated Credit
    Agreement dated as of December 7, 2004, between AirComp LLC
    and Wells Fargo Bank, NA (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.62 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 13, 2004).
    




 


    10


    .22


 


First Amendment to Stockholder
    Agreement by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and the
    Stockholders named therein (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.44 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 5, 2005).
    




 


    10


    .23


 


Purchase Agreement dated as of
    January 12, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc,
    the Guarantors named therein and the Initial Purchasers named
    therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .24


 


Purchase Agreement dated as of
    August 8, 2006 by and between the Registrant, the
    guarantors listed on Schedule B thereto and RBC Capital
    Markets Corporation (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .25


 


Purchase Agreement dated as of
    January 24, 2007 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    the Guarantors named therein and the Initial Purchasers named
    therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).
    




 


    10


    .26


 


Amended and Restated Credit
    Agreement dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., as borrower, Royal bank of Canada,
    as administrative agent and Collateral Agent, RBC Capital
    Markets, as lead arranger and sole bookrunner, and the lenders
    party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to
    the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .27


 


First Amendment to Amended and
    Restated Credit Agreement dated as of August 8, 2006, by
    and among the Registrant, the guarantors named thereto and Royal
    Bank of Canada (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3
    to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).
    





    99



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  




Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    10


    .28


 


Senior Unsecured Bridge Loan
    Agreement, dated December 18, 2006, by and among the
    Registrant, Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent, RBC
    Capital Markets Corporation, as exclusive lead arranger and sole
    bookrunner, and the guarantors and institutional lenders named
    thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 19, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .29


 


Strategic Agreement dated
    July 1, 2003 between Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal
    Argentina and DLS Argentina Limited Sucursal Argentina
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on December 29, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .30


 


Amendment No. 1 dated
    May 18, 2005 to Strategic Agreement between Pan American
    Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina and DLS Argentina Limited Sucursal
    Argentina (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to
    the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on December 29, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .31


 


Amendment No. 2 dated
    January 1, 2006 between Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal
    Argentina and DLS Argentina Limited Sucursal Argentina
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on December 29, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .32


 


Investor Rights Agreement, dated
    December 18, 2006, by and between the Registrant and
    Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc. (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 19, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .33


 


Investors Rights Agreement dated
    as of August 18, 2006 by and among the Registrant and the
    investors named on Exhibit A thereto (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .34*


 


2003 Incentive Stock Plan
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.12 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed August 17, 2005).
    




 


    10


    .35*


 


Form of Option Certificate issued
    pursuant to 2003 Incentive Stock Plan (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.41 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2003).
    




 


    10


    .36*


 


2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .37*


 


Form of Employee Restricted Stock
    Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .38*


 


Form of Employee Nonqualified
    Stock Option Agreement (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .39*


 


Form of Employee Incentive Stock
    Option Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4
    to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .40*


 


Form of Non-Employee Director
    Restricted Stock Agreement (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).
    




 


    10


    .41*


 


Form of Non-Employee Director
    Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).
    




 


    14


    .1


 


Code of Ethics (incorporated by
    reference to the
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 1, 2004).
    




 


    16


    .1


 


Letter from Gordon
    Hughes & Banks LLP dated October 5, 2004, to the
    Securities and Exchange Commission (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 6, 2004).
    




 


    21


    .1


 


Subsidiaries of Registrant.
    




 


    23


    .1


 


Consent of UHY LLP.
    




 


    31


    .1


 


Certification of Chief Executive
    Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
    of 2002.
    




 


    31


    .2


 


Certification of Chief Financial
    Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
    of 2002.
    




 


    32


    .1


 


Certification of the Chief
    Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer pursuant to
    18 U.S.C. 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of
    the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
    





 

 








    * 


    Compensation Plan or Agreement




    100






EX-21.1
2
h44611exv21w1.htm
SUBSIDIARIES



exv21w1



 

Exhibit 21.1

SUBSIDIARIES





 
 
 




Name

 
Jurisdiction of Organization








 
 
 




 
 
 


AirComp L.L.C.

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers GP, LLC

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers LP, LLC

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers Management, LP

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc.

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Rental Services, Inc.

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services, Inc.

 
Texas


DLS Argentina Limited

 
British Virgin Islands


DLS Drilling, Logistics and Services Company

 
British Virgin Islands


Mountain Compressed Air, Inc.

 
Texas


Petro-Rentals, Inc.

 
Louisiana


OilQuip Rentals, Inc.

 
Delaware


Strata Directional Technology, Inc.

 
Texas


Tanus Argentina S.A.

 
Argentina











EX-23.1
3
h44611exv23w1.htm
CONSENT OF UHY LLP



exv23w1



 

Exhibit 23.1

CONSENT OF UHY LLP
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 

We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statement on Form S-3 (No.
333-139058), the Registration Statements on Form S-4 (Nos. 333-140302 and 333-136978) and the
Registration Statements on Form S-8 (Nos. 333-139957 and 333-127092) of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.
of our reports dated March 15, 2007, with respect to the consolidated financial statements and
schedule of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. as of December 31, 2006 and 2005 and for the years then
ended, Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.’s management assessment of the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting, and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting of
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. as of December 31, 2006, which appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2006.
/s/ UHY LLP

Houston, Texas
March 15, 2007








EX-31.1
4
h44611exv31w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CEO PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w1



 


EXHIBIT 31.1

 

CERTIFICATION
    BY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

 

    I, Munawar Hidayatallah, certify that:

 

    1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.;

 

    2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any
    untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
    fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
    circumstances under which such statements were made, not
    misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;

 

    3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and
    other financial information included in this report, fairly
    present in all material respects the financial condition,
    results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of,
    and for, the periods presented in this report;

 

    4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are
    responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls
    and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(e)
    and
    15d-15(e))
    and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in
    Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(f)
    and
    15d-15(f))
    for the registrant and have:

 

    (a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or
    caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed
    under our supervision, to ensure that material information
    relating to the registrant, including its consolidated
    subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
    entities, particularly during the period in which this report is
    being prepared;

 

    (b) Designed such internal control over financial
    reporting, or caused such internal control over financial
    reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide
    reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
    reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
    external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
    accounting principles;

 

    (c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s
    disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report
    our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure
    controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by
    this report based on such evaluation;

 

    (d) Disclosed in this report any change in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that
    occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter
    (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
    annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
    likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal
    control over financial reporting; and

 

    5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I
    have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal
    control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
    auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board
    of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):

 

    (a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in
    the design or operation of internal control over financial
    reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
    registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and
    report financial information; and

 

    (b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves
    management or other employees who have a significant role in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.

 







 
    By 


/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH





Munawar H. Hidayatallah


Chief Executive Officer and Chairman

 

    Date: March 14, 2007








EX-31.2
5
h44611exv31w2.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CFO PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w2



 


EXHIBIT 31.2

 

CERTIFICATION
    BY CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

 

    I, Victor M. Perez, certify that:

 

    1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.;

 

    2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any
    untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
    fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
    circumstances under which such statements were made, not
    misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;

 

    3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and
    other financial information included in this report, fairly
    present in all material respects the financial condition,
    results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of,
    and for, the periods presented in this report;

 

    4. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I
    are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure
    controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(e)
    and
    15d-15(e))
    and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in
    Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(f)
    and
    15d-15(f))
    for the registrant and have:

 

    (a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or
    caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed
    under our supervision, to ensure that material information
    relating to the registrant, including its consolidated
    subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
    entities, particularly during the period in which this report is
    being prepared;

 

    (b) Designed such internal control over financial
    reporting, or caused such internal control over financial
    reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide
    reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
    reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
    external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
    accounting principles;

 

    (c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s
    disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report
    our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure
    controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by
    this report based on such evaluation;

 

    (d) Disclosed in this report any change in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that
    occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter
    (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
    annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
    likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal
    control over financial reporting; and

 

    5. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I
    have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal
    control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
    auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board
    of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):

 

    (a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in
    the design or operation of internal control over financial
    reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
    registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and
    report financial information; and

 

    (b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves
    management or other employees who have a significant role in the
    registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.

 







 
    By 


/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ





Victor M. Perez


Chief Financial Officer

 

    Date: March 14, 2007








EX-32.1
6
h44611exv32w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CEO & CFO PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv32w1



 


EXHIBIT 32.1

 

CERTIFICATION
    PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
    AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
    SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002

 

    In connection with the Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. (the “Company”), for the
    period ended December 31, 2006, as filed with the
    Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the
    “Report”), the undersigned hereby certify, pursuant to
    18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:

 

    (1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of
    Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
    1934; and

 

    (2) The information contained in the Report fairly
    presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and
    results of the operations of the Company.

 







 
     By: 


/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH





Munawar H. Hidayatallah


Chief Executive Officer

 

    Date: March 14, 2007

 







 
    By: 


/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ





Victor M. Perez


Chief Financial Officer

 

    Date: March 14, 2007








GRAPHIC
7
h44611h4461101.gif
GRAPHIC

begin 644 h44611h4461101.gif
M1TE&.#EA50+_`-4@`,#`P$!`0("`@+^_OW]_?_#P\#\_/Z"@H-#0T.#@X+"P
ML&!@8#`P,!`0$%!04)"0D._O[W!P<"`@(-_?W\_/SY^?GZ^OKX^/CU]?7Q\?
M'T]/3P\/#R\O+V]O;P```/_______P``````````````````````````````
M````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````
M`````````````````````````````````"'Y!`$``"``+`````!5`O\```;_
M0)!P2"P:C\BD$PNF\_HM'K-;KO?\+A\
M3J_;[_B\?L\W'@(!#D((`@H"0X4""'V,C8Z/D)&2CA$```E"`4('!R"#`4@`H="'B#'0L2]S,W.
MS]"1"0R"R\;(B,5%?X#=WM_@X>+CY.7FY^CIZNOL[>[O\/'R\_3U]O?X^?8,
MFFX)Q]:P)1NFC8@`#`,2*ES(L*'#AQ`C2IQ(L:+%BQ@S:FS(X8&ECR!#BAQ)
MLJ3)DRA3JES)LJ7+ES!CRIQ)LR:`!_W<-``!8(&0_P2Q,(%88,N(``(?DBI=
MRK2ITZ=0HTJ=2K6JU:M8LVIM:J!HM*]@ZP#(R29!!%">.GT"0=8@TJUPX\J=
M2[>N7:==P^K5&\"`W[\&VH89NZ9``P$`5@U*A,C0+*-O[TJ>3+FR9:EY]VJ&
M%L"I8#"$)QV]3+JTZ=-7,V]>W:MST\]?0DL:C;JV[=N65;/>C9$>B
MC;NX\>.IO?)>7LKW4N!=A$,BCKRZ=>NZF6N?Y%PI="[2'U&_3KX\ZNS;TSOJ
MGO3[EO".QIN?3U\R>O7X][#_X%X+_$;RU2?@@%K=E]^!=10@`3_?G%7&?XP$
M2."$%$)E(((8PK$``VY`V/^'A!8"]E<%(3QG0U`"1
M;45`!DM!X$%2%ECY09)1=:"!4A2<.8"84''PHV0=L)G091QT,->23>9)Q@$-
M"!5E?WE0B=>566J%P08G)O7E!VM6-8`'12IE9Z-1&?#F702PN>)E!A1:H')Z
MAEH&GX_]&8J@7!$:5P46Q+G4HHT.X.,'0=K(%`8J7FE`BF*R6L%;EC*:P0`8
M#+LECA#0Z.,$'1"@@0:U%IJI4B0.D($%Q19)`:O0$EM!!A`!'@@\,`#:YK4HP03C.-4
M+D[@P:6PBADL`19\4#&[!A^%+`-M=249U$``PY:#2@>
M6;.KZE9V'GRSV&TG);*U5OY*P(P>K,L4I<%V$&/<@.<-_[@'9$)`MU*HRZQI
MD7.OCG)2ZXH,@0$67$#FM9XF'?RX5N%9^?1*7.[3'%<'ZBEFGV<%0=@?9!!Z
MQ*;_2"($PW:Y0985PUZXF+23OKO8SR;U\_SGI]^WID@%;_?".#+>T^QW+:X\
MCFXG^Y&)5N0ZKMB+>A!,`"T=+BN;_D%`PW,F`6"F+8F/K$"4<1BRL#'K@=&\(Q%
M>!(%3[6]"9D+*N:*U%,F4*0)-/]P*A`8P!V5\L:M])$I/U/(Q9*5E0GD;H](
M,R,:T<@G/V&O@G:X8(4F.94)P.M@AJQ`!^0X&>DMLG*DND/V.-=&2IKR*D/;
M59'6=+'*>/*34=,7O]8HFE*>\I;S>24L1:6OJHD2DG60)"Z'B1M=[C)/E\O<
M+]E(S&;2QYC'S)#U]C!*"]K2F=BT#32CB:`)4A.8=!!F-L?9245R4T]J_"8S
MR=WDG/)D3RGF"Y&EHV@9S#M
M.="&?LJ@H>JE(Q0:3H8Z]*)5*2A$]Y+,1U`4H!;%J$@M9,Z-:F>:'OVG'`(:
MN)%B5*/_)OV*-U.ZSJP$;(-:8=6,(@7$%;7(*=NJ`)D(98$C625(-$H(D:H"
MH]*XR`*L,J)=8!K39Z23IK74"@4\@$-.>H\#)X(`6).2I#`YY6,M!"0'7!>Y
MJ[CJ8/2*RE#O(D=B@9"L(9T*5:O*#'E&XJ,KS:M2.("4MVHI5_;;P!TIQ11(
M<>U*H[/?5?Q&O.-0(#(=L("U7,R5K[OHYU]5&H<`'8ENJ$6M!L2$/@RD
M]K5S;8KXNN2!"E0@5XQEEP94^"M.=N!C3;F`C2H6+=]1RWXUTL#/.D`BL\KJ
M1Q?8K1"!5C*6&;%859Q1XJZ5+0CP+$FYR@`'ZHH\6F%Q6_/Z_X!PD412T&X'
MH9,`K!82`"40)`!4ETB":5^;6@ULH*X><"U_V1L5#Q3*P*3++9C\NZX;:8U-
M0;-`FDH'LU8&CF870(JM;#<_VD'O`TO,D)FD8B%>6QO>Y=CD1#(=\L,*`HG"C``H0AY`*L!3)705]G#8L5!+^J?V-C
MBJUFVSQ->4DI-K+2WII"V8K-BL./"Q:ES-KAP-T(A@,`GIEMA[-6LLC)%E`1
MCMJ*,:]JK:0YCD9'1='C*SS@QR`H0#\,,0S%!*"^;G%KQL3:V:K4#TVX2[#!
M/O8HV7%Y>$KYTO?R**;>+86RM!+9[O_*K+.R=?I,I%:M4M;EO_GE2HX$P+0)
MD,S[MNQDQ]W89.#)L@0SC&0`*2Z*I@((,B$NR"5R;&
M$99PJ+/I4(^ZU*=.]0`P
M`!A5CSH_V/#_`&$!D
M#0AP`#$D0)0':&,G.U'&`\;N4KK,#RH*KM!G`QX)T9*BSU,HP$<8\(`$9'X0
M@G#`+'1/^M+'I<4UATJRODS)U;/>$?`U!>RM<'!:"`,Q/#E$`5R!9-];7Z\`
M/_XI=GR*Y5?A`$(IP`,4P"_R=QT)++U^0XVO_3WL^1;>7T/ZU2]0]K5_!@B``3@'5X4+\:<&_6>`Y(2`"0@'_WZE"PV8
M!@\(@=DD@1/8!@K0`*62"Q>(!AFH@<[$@1VH!LFW"R-X!B5H@L2$@BEX!@E`
M-#=BA;I#1E-Q)&MW
M,`AA&CVHA&`P@$'XA&T@3%NU,-^S5EOA)2W$(I\&7+22*Y<5.&("0EGR*'(D
M5F$U5DL!-UG"<4PG9?[V04U1)WH55ZZ4A'9(!Q$0#-`@A&0@3.3B.'#A7Z&3
M(TMQ*(FR64FQ,)1U,HD2)V&S)4LQ^#J9"&(&U(ET"(JA&`<5
MZ`RF.`8!DD8RW@\V9O46X?0S,:\#%.EFDGZ3"V]2,<
M"0$]LF)Z(UXH@F;_:J:*I58Z7V8IB*,018(^%OE00ZD'->A+T=",8B!,&)!6
M)W.)5?$68D582=&*CD@K?3,\H,8S(I71RE_@B56R#,C+!<7D0%$2/$]
M2T%E]::8;&(!J)E6X&@V#01JC'*9YP@R/S(KFMDVAD&`=5O4@285)$L'8-E*M27K@-"(D1TRC4F!N`F
MR0.4+!,IWP-C%6``*V,`@X,)!CI(%]8(>'H4%_O)G8Y"5GN7
M.P:)>D"#)G%X)]X9HF$PBH@&%B7Z!2=*25NR21HHE#JJ!*X7%C_J!4%J2N9R
MHR-EI$=Z!`NY&DO:!4UZA*J7HU.J!44IGJ_I@&2GI=@DI5WZ$S;(&E?*!5E*
MI@1BIEW:FIJQIEO0IFXJ('`ZI>')&W2J!79ZI\_$I6=*!2.Z&7V:!7\*J.:1
MIR'*H\QQJ%B0J(I*'HRZFDFJIF&*@6,ZJ:=4J4-9I=HA',0@`%4C9`W0`$-6
M!`C`D)K*J1?EJJS(FJS*NJS,NJR".JA-<)?J(1P.X$L"(#!4TPIXV:M06!#0^JUL(*?+(1Q-
M:!@"XTO*Q*U[Z*W@VJYGL*?32A;:<*T>(`$&P:O/&JGLZJ[\&@:%^JAD86P#
M@Y=-R!/Y>@4,UZ\*ZP6.FA_DJGD2(#"[*@0+,'JL\*SY-03W5009RVS[NK`@
M:P67NAW"<3FZ2F3"Y@&SI*Y2D``+(`#[L@D'4&2!-F1'5@0)&[(Z.P6@>B#A
M80@SNPFCNJU)NW
M>KNW?-NW?ONW@!NXQ=H6"!"Q#/`8'VBK^&H%"7``#&"O;;MP^YJS8ENY0P"O
M&5*R#3`P#5``0C8P:)NOAG$3GP<"H3<,%HNS3VNY4?NO#DL6!Y`P"Q"Q`A,`
MCI2V4R`+M_<*N;=[K$JYK!NU#=LDY'JK-`@#O!\M@``TD=]
MJAN\K#NRD="T9"`]"&>]8MNSHI``$J"^
M@R&O11``VE``HJ`F"_HVJ_B]NM_`NUTEH*
M_P\P7AF0O-M+%@%`K/G+P`TP+@`*=JOP``)=<*D50XQ5=P->)W&&0L?W9LQAT(`)Y"``<[!@B0"E>'
M.0?`JBC!JM'Q'2Z[N8JKO!KLQZL)R%PVR%U0`(80``T@`9J'R6(`(2E+,$+,
MQY3\G98L,Z`,;.,;L0$0`0K@Q'P0'OA+N]BZ`!%0RO\.V,>G?'^I_&FK'`4)
MH`!97*\5&\QH(!P]D3"/"R5$J[^]7)>_W#?(O`32J\0>8+\*(+]8)00.0#!$
MP19($,4NR,O1?'S3'#C57`18?,@+D,@BV!8)(``28+SB?`3DG(/F?,X!MP"!
M7,ULS,D-\,G<_'JPH0`.X`!'*P16N\Y.`+S\'("")@'BP,A4@`#C>\@1`'Y&
MJ03S+`$1D`#SO,>['-$^B`!,6-!5H,D'7*\.X!%Z<34('37Y2S:?"5H
M78L$"\"4'\`!1YT>HKH$KJW/L!U3*/V\X[P`X^A"'I#7G6W!!U`2GD?21OW;
M&[731R!^$K"YG3)@'#"Q44/"&.SG)TGW&W"
MWOW:X,U-6UTJ1L8`#1#2\$3"3@<.]?S>OAW?QW0YI/@3DA<`XQU-Y.K1O3V$
MN0W@_TPBV$/P!ZB*W)\D'.O]$_[-X`[^29-M7Z3-`$$;4_Z"UK67X:?8X!N>
M'Z2=&-\I[=X];L
M2!O+J^N-TS\N35Q5=5DY$@`%!=<-4&6JD5VLP:!XDV^&0@@>0W@U`&W
MVTI`Y4=@L0"P$X(F!(2VM&RAO4S^Y=M1WP+#U0E(PLM-$LT-VE'P&,>@M?;%
MM=F]K%(*;Z9J^Z9S>Z9[^Z:`>
MZJ(^Z@-CP=WMYU.`WY$+MM6+Z.DQSPT`XL+`)P?>?OH]#O_]C>I1H`"ST.>F
M^^NBY[&NKATS[>),K=H^F."3+NE&$&P_L;NWQWNT\+M>/NRF4,LY7E_3-]LS
M:.%+H-93``NCN@K"#7W2&V@"S.K6'M/E/>1$$-QE3>1T[7DA&!X`8,NUV]6KS=O_#O"-$.:+;N@@(-X)*1VQ
M"ZRE;>+.^/`0KP?U?=_K/;L4[LMD48-WW@VTJ]TSOM8?CPN*;N#5PP".GHS<
M*P$A/@1YO+(-?^8>__)S(.$+D-<07LD6++\`D*X]KU\_#_3^`+.R?M9D*\VT
MRML#5JS3FG#ST1(FJ[?H?Z+W-X[SX
MPN[[9Q#7DN(!>3\%?$+F79KZ"1,!3+#5N#U[BH="A"L-=_R
MD.W]7C#,+6W9>`?64J#V_5JRM$O1@`#)WLK]'0\$(.&06#0>D4GEDMET/J%1
MZ91:M5ZA_X"'0^()"`X>RX=<_G0"4P3#4<"^X7'YG`Y(#Q4>0:*8<'B*``#H
MH@0$"!$3%1<9&QV7$@XB&#P8%AX0AOX,.#LY.3P>H@`:(AY/45/G[(@B!I$<
M7H4$58D,:W%S=7=YAPH`!`(:&KX`W(P$DY63,Y\>&@YZI:%B@9(@[X'A<:FLGEYYVLA0Z3@(FZ<;_I_P$&K))`03`/$AP\
MD'6J``,&QP1&I&O9Y3`429D^?J")-JG0IGJX##;;]_)G`T)Y3,F]&Y?\(@E\MGDJQ
M9KWR*]BP8A!["6B@4ZO$,!@(8-@P=9%,!/F$/G99U*:@4<
M,"B*5Z""#13*4-B@P!'%:$H>"TG@ERYARW8)&D2H<%X"-F`O`V10PG#R6+U&X"FO@0("QD>^:BV_`(4.#NHX2
M)#O0=,%%2C4QBJ"IMP2AS0$"2KM`M;86%.Z^\B"DXH$,/(BO"+TH":`O>ORH
M:0'0&GKHI0@X0.R#`3BX#0L$DGF@*0?_+NJ")F(L8J\I9:X`8(,!RAA@`[((
M"2^@\2(LLHD$&AB``-2,R&RFS8`)M``Q'+:>FX@!#8@+H@(V*&`D0+(V`+]I+IM110@6(2$0V
M79::_(`1RT0R"&@@VEZ6L>Y%C"CIS;>#?"U70UW1;4HA6]G5E(H##.B-`^BD
M97:D9PD)@+%Z_[D%8+]*A?&`Q@@\*-8,`U1L2YG]SLQ(QIK6Q`C7-Y5IP)-.
MO-@VH`(:(*V,"K3E=PHA&2(BOT#&'`)?.`ZPB!(:`[!0Y#BH-03&_[2S41"_
M!.!`W#"C/&(9AJ_#Z&&:M+O(QDSAK"(`<9G$"H$&,!A@``S@F5D*DH&3=8@#
M#BC@0Q#$+@!L)%9^0P`>C0U:ZWJT$`#@&2T2D.(F$/`@@XL[V6"CAHV^*>D:
M<250$)D7>;JW9F%*`.`(4GY;":X;">"5`NXH"`24A`C@N+2Q6+LW`MP>"0'&
M"6^"ZP9"N"J[VDH"!1$OCH'2!/!,7^.!Q&S[Q
M5_P!Y#O6!`C6_OOQIXEM,PC(W___`1C`_)5(@`4TX`'O=RW3()"!#02@N!P8
M00E.D((5M*`$UZ>(XFV.(_)3V7VB9P4&[*\,_;M)`-IDB%]%97`7$9#NEJ$Q
M*N0-,4N:7/:VLSUDO8EW6``?)=:$$@L=8`,$L%JV>D@.(+BGP`Q?`$BK\52EO1D"0O=Q"(I-83'X=LPY@
M:$
M.F:JE8N*5*,]1<8C_\/AT5V4!)Y]T$*ENJ"=[BGT">ERTQLBFE3VJ!)".V6'
M3['ZTWM%DQYZ(64QD'!'7+YLCU0-1T%M2@PPJ-0N5JUH5C7*46H(-1S9S!!*
M#'5+=5;BC#D5&@#86HZ"Y-$2[6&J1=_9DJO"E;%"`VI'N1J2@*8C`KQ,XWYR
M20QVFI4)"IB/`3(@F"44M#_;6RN?W-I8U8;UL7.-+$Q`>A">X@T8W?0".(6V
M@3&0X0(-H`Q)@Q&;2_1Q3ZE=[7$=NU77$/67*OW%?@[ZA82.IC23JBTJA;@L
MXR*7NUH5"5U?XE6U^E6P`BBM!WHS@),F5%H@;8!BW]K=X\IU&N#UB5U/\O^I
M*:`75EQ<5FSA*U\!3ZZU]7UM:"9;B>=1IACF0S,3KO")D_O=`T.(N4Y$PDSVQHD-E"(K`#``3%UJ`(]D
MF,$HIC!]I6%?W(@7K$.(U^)J;+`2-K/$&OQD_-1X""ON%3XEJ8W!C'.A[UJ!5MZDS_BZQ<">N)B)5QV%?+-]:Z
M./6N@1ULX*C:&[,6]K&1S:`P)YO9S59%KXOM;&E/>]C+IO:UL8T%:/?#V-GV
M=K:W;95N?YOZS[V3<;^;WI6.-RI^76]]H_C>I\CW
MO@$NX'X_XM\!-_A\B.AP.G#4"Q"6>\2E2?"L?.ALG
MYZUQD<?,%R0YSWW^<^!
M'G2A#YWH13?ZT8]^\SGD7!K)Q,MW\()Q:D#]+E*?!M4;48#`/L*_`O!B+IQ^
M%ZR7Q>K2&+M6RMZ+LY-G_Y/*W#HR#QV1M6,E[;R8NU+JOHN[M^\0SVQZW`6R
M=Y_D71>"[PGA]*4'1P&F`@`'M%T(+E$]ZU%?!#2V;&QDR^<^M0$1V27BCKX(QE1FCT+=
M>S$"!4A`?W`O9]OK\VO"7P2K)(/\5A0`]>?A1LQ!X/K5QT,A24$`V)I1_9G/
MXGGB)T+P:Y\\XAM?^L;+O1#PR7Q3O7VTJ=\^$5QR?'WAX?VB!`'MCR'^D@\B
M;B1U'`4`A\`<_L_Y0("DWF+ZS*\_@"`71[P#@A1H/$MI0"))0!>^A$)4P>9`G"Z-P
M>0F02Q`45+6KXC,AC@%18L$X<`ZAKB_^`/$$YG%C#I%6*&U!+A&TX&
M!!3@#E:Q'4"0&Q9$`2KK&`1$F601`5Z1*BSI,0K@\J+_8(/T:QAQT13:`0R^
MZ!H4@!0'P;^T"(LV1Q2FD9BLP!9?(1?A#S5X$7FHXA>#40B&,18ZQQCO0/54
M)NSB8!2'H!39T;(J@@_NV*(O(1@(.DC#&+@>%(&K^+^:@[@"\2`HY0HNZ;AL<[BIZ\?\<
M!7)\$?^*@AI3DALOD@A(T/&@YS$P$?[0D8/FZ`2/T1_[41Y]<@Y8$GE(LA54
M@B)Z+,I-4(V9F9S\`_T_LF@1Y$`!Y\,D#OA($H,X!_.)LX@%TD(52-JUN`.V;(!?_+XVK)S[.`5K&$S
M[Q)Z$K,=!#/Z'),6(9,([F`R.Z@!!\$JWP#K0-,S\:`!F,\W4]$WV1(Q+T09H3,,>%$U@/'\FD$VRQ/^QN_%/`+ZWA/_
M+&G,`)(@4$HV4-%4C2>/A1_4)&QKB="R"-RWS"FH4(J`3%],`3=62
M1R/21RU4YH*D03CB3N_A"#SR*<,4!+BT^+14;,AT6:!.2E-J1@U5%KZ#]91O
M-C+G$$[.K%57!(@(VTL*PU'@>`%N/X7FX<3^%E3JPP150CFS2
M`")QL3YA0@,_9>=H8C\>8S^T;E_HU0WV@RF:<`XJ:9,:
M`F)`8#_7`1>;`6&;22]+B29V9B/X8&H\I"6)T6R.86$S
M@1K_SR:B`0%,P5O9T1BQ(190=@SOKV%I@@0A-AJDE&+[T`X]I&#-)E_#)OTJ
MXEFI-`_JU659=B\G0QD-=A];+V#_[VC=0&.CH:9^(3NA2@":T&-I(@$\,ONL
M%F8?HR5U]B!F%F;+(68U"0%0KQ')74-NN8&XJ)1W;I$;0#81M,X7O$<R*LKB
M]K87)F,(\D-F[#8)?@$LC!%Q`8LAXH$ZDN!P)\<O"C<7%I<V*<.LW"9SS8IR
;:R%*C,]D*NIQ`==QO]7T6+=U7?=ULRH(```[
`
end
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
</SEC-DOCUMENT>
-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
