item 3. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk market risk sensitive instruments and positions except as discussed below, there have been no material changes in market risk from the information provided in item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk of the company's 2002 form 10 k. the risk inherent in the company's fuel related market risk sensitive instruments and positions is the potential loss arising from adverse changes in the price of fuel. the sensitivity analysis presented does not consider the effects that such adverse changes may have on overall economic activity, nor does it consider additional actions management may take to mitigate the company's exposure to such changes. actual results may differ. aircraft fuel the company's earnings are affected by changes in the price and availability of aircraft fuel. in order to provide a measure of control over price and supply, the company trades and ships fuel and maintains fuel storage facilities to support its flight operations. the company also manages the price risk of fuel costs primarily by using jet fuel, heating oil, and crude swap and option contracts. as of june 30, 2003, the company had hedged approximately 29 percent of its expected fuel needs for the remainder of 2003, approximately 21 percent of its expected first quarter 2004 fuel needs and an insignificant percentage of its expected fuel needs beyond the first quarter of 2004, compared to approximately 32 percent of its estimated 2003 fuel requirements, 15 percent of its estimated 2004 fuel requirements, and approximately four percent of its estimated 2005 fuel requirements hedged at december 31, 2002. beginning in march 2003, the company revised its hedging strategy and, in june 2003, terminated substantially all of its contracts with maturities beyond march 2004. the company's reduced credit rating has limited its ability to enter into certain types of fuel hedge contracts. a further deterioration of its credit rating or liquidity position may negatively affect the company's ability to hedge fuel in the future. for additional information see note 16 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. 