item 2. management s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations forward looking information statements in this report contain various forward looking statements within the meaning of section 27a of the securities act of 1933, as amended, and section 21e of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, which represent the company s expectations or beliefs concerning future events. when used in this document and in documents incorporated herein by reference, the words expects, plans, anticipates, indicates, believes, forecast, guidance, outlook, may, will, should, seeks, targets and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements. similarly, statements that describe the company s objectives, plans or goals, or actions the company may take in the future, are forward looking statements. forward looking statements include, without limitation, the company s expectations concerning operations and financial conditions, including changes in capacity, revenues, and costs future financing plans and needs the amounts of its unencumbered assets and other sources of liquidity fleet plans overall economic and industry conditions plans and objectives for future operations regulatory approvals and actions, including the company s applications for antitrust immunity with other oneworld alliance members and the impact on the company of its results of operations in recent years and the sufficiency of its financial resources to absorb that impact. in particular, this report includes an estimate of revenue improvement and cost savings associated with certain company initiatives, a statement regarding when those benefits will be realized, and a statement regarding the company s expectations regarding the narrowing of its labor cost disadvantage, each of which is a forward looking statement. guidance given in this report regarding capacity, fuel consumption, fuel prices, fuel hedging, and unit costs, and statements regarding expectations of regulatory approval of the company s applications for antitrust immunity with other oneworld members are also forward looking statements. other forward looking statements include statements which do not relate solely to historical facts, such as, without limitation, statements which discuss the possible future effects of current known trends or uncertainties, or which indicate that the future effects of known trends or uncertainties cannot be predicted, guaranteed or assured. all forward looking statements in this report are based upon information available to the company on the date of this report. the company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. forward looking statements are subject to a number of factors that could cause the company s actual results to differ materially from the company s expectations. the following factors could cause the company s actual results to differ materially from those expressed in forward looking statements the materially weakened financial condition of the company, resulting from its significant losses in recent years very weak demand for air travel and lower investment asset returns resulting from the severe global economic downturn the company s need to raise substantial additional funds and its ability to do so on acceptable terms the ability of the company to generate additional revenues and reduce its costs continued high and volatile fuel prices and further increases in the price of fuel, and the availability of fuel the company s substantial indebtedness and other obligations the ability of the company to satisfy certain covenants and conditions in certain of its financing and other agreements changes in economic and other conditions beyond the company s control, and the volatile results of the company s operations the fiercely and increasingly competitive business environment faced by the company potential industry consolidation and alliance changes competition with reorganized carriers low fare levels by historical standards and the company s reduced pricing power changes in the company s corporate or business strategy extensive government regulation of the company s business conflicts overseas or terrorist attacks uncertainties with respect to the company s international operations outbreaks of a disease such as sars, avian flu or the h1n1 virus that affects travel behavior labor costs that are higher than those of the company s competitors uncertainties with respect to the company s relationships with unionized and other employee work groups increased insurance costs and potential reductions of available insurance coverage the company s ability to retain key management personnel potential failures or disruptions of the company s computer, communications or other technology systems losses and adverse publicity resulting from any accident involving the company s aircraft interruptions or disruptions in service at one or more of the company s primary market airports the heavy taxation of the airline industry changes in the price of the company s common stock and the ability of the company to reach acceptable agreements with third parties. additional information concerning these and other factors is contained in the company s securities and exchange commission filings, including the 2009 form 10 k. 11 table of contents overview the company recorded net income of 129 million in the third quarter of 2010 compared to a net loss of 377 million in the same period last year. the company s improved performance is primarily the result of higher unit revenues passenger revenue per available seat mile . mainline passenger unit revenues increased 10.7 percent for the third quarter due to a 10.7 percent increase in passenger yield passenger revenue per passenger mile and a stable load factor compared to the same period in 2009. although passenger yield showed year over year improvement, passenger yield remains below levels set in 2000 despite cumulative inflation of nearly 30 percent over the same time frame. the company believes this is the result of a fragmented industry with numerous competitors, excess capacity and pricing transparency resulting from the use of the internet and other factors. the company believes that its limited pricing power could persist indefinitely. the increases in comparative third quarter revenue were partially offset by a significant year over year increase in fuel prices from an average of 2.06 per gallon in the third quarter of 2009 to an average of 2.24 per gallon in the third quarter of 2010, including the effects of hedging. the price increase resulted in 110 million in incremental year over year fuel expense in the three months ended september 30, 2010 based on the year over year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied by gallons consumed . in late 2009, the company unveiled a new business plan flightplan 2020. flightplan 2020 is a strategic framework developed to secure the company s future by focusing on what will be required to succeed in the airline business over the next decade. it establishes the company s priorities and a clear path to better position the company to meet the challenges of the coming years. this plan for achieving sustained profitability has five tenets i invest wisely, ii earn customer loyalty, iii strengthen and defend our global network, iv be a good place for good people and v fly profitably. under flightplan 2020, the company has launched its network strategy that focuses resources in its cornerstone markets of dallas fort worth, chicago, miami, los angeles and new york, and has continued to execute its fleet renewal and replacement plan. further, the company continues to pursue its strategy to form cooperative agreements with oneworld members and other airlines. in july of 2010, american obtained clearance from the european commission ec and approval by the department of transportation dot for antitrust immunity ati for its planned cooperation with british airways, iberia, finnair and royal jordanian. in addition, the company is awaiting final approval by regulatory entities of american s joint business agreement jba with japan airlines jal . regulatory conditions for ati approval for the british airways, iberia, finnair and royal jordanian cooperative agreement include obligations to lease to other carriers up to seven takeoff and landing slot pairs at london heathrow and up to three john f. kennedy airport operational authorities, depending on market conditions. american began implementation of the jba with british airways and iberia and expanded cooperation with finnair and royal jordanian in october of 2010. no assurances can be given as to any arrangements that may ultimately be implemented or any benefits the company may derive from such arrangements. in conjunction with the initiation of the jba with british airways and iberia, american also announced that it will be sending recall notices to 545 furloughed flight attendants and 250 furloughed pilots. several factors have contributed to the company s ability to recall these employees, primarily its efforts to capitalize on new international flying and business opportunities associated with the jba with british airways and iberia, continuing to strengthen its presence in its cornerstone markets, and preparing for its anticipated jba with jal. on october 6, 2010, dot issued an order tentatively approving the joint application filed by american and jal for ati on certain routes between north america and asia. implementation of the jba with jal is pending final approval by dot and joint notification to the ministry of land infrastructure, transport and tourism of japan mlit . implementation is also subject to successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and commercial arrangements and other approvals. american expects to begin implementing the jba with jal in 2011. no assurances can be given as to any arrangements that may ultimately be implemented or any benefits that the company may derive from such arrangements. 12 table of contents the company s previously announced commercial collaboration in new york and boston with jetblue commenced in july of 2010. american s agreement with jetblue provides customers with interline service in non overlapping markets, letting customers connect between 14 of american s international destinations from new york and boston and 18 domestic cities flown by jetblue. further, american announced it will expand its relationship with jetblue so that aadvantage members and members of jetblue s customer loyalty program will be able to earn aadvantage miles or jetblue points, respectively, when they fly on american and jetblue cooperative interline routes. under the terms of the agreements for commercial collaboration, american intends to transfer eight slot pairs at ronald reagan national airport in washington d.c. currently owned by american and one slot pair at white plains, new york currently owned by amr eagle to jetblue, and jetblue intends to transfer twelve slot pairs at jfk to american the reciprocal frequent flyer earning benefits and slot transfers are currently scheduled for the fourth quarter of 2010. also in july of 2010, the company announced that it plans to extend its network through a new commercial collaboration with germany s second largest airline, air berlin. the agreement between american and air berlin initiates a comprehensive interline codeshare and frequent flyer relationship that will allow customers of each airline to book and travel on the other s network and earn frequent flyer miles. american and air berlin expect to implement the codeshare upon regulatory approval. no assurances can be given as to any arrangements that may ultimately be implemented or any benefits that the company may derive from such arrangements. further, in august of 2010, american launched codesharing on flights operated by gol airlines gol , increasing the level of accessibility between the united states and brazil. american s aadvantage customers can already earn and redeem frequent flyer miles on all gol flights, and gol s customers can earn and redeem frequent flyer miles on all american airlines flights. in october of 2010, the company announced that it had signed an agreement with jetstar airways jetstar , an affiliate airline of qantas airways a oneworld alliance member . the agreement establishes both an interline and a codeshare relationship with jetstar to several destinations in new zealand and allows customers to earn frequent flyer miles on american marketed flights. american and jetstar expect to implement the codeshare upon approval of the agreement by certain regulatory authorities. also in october of 2010, american announced the initiation of an interline agreement with canada s westjet. the agreement provides american customers connecting service to 25 new canadian cities not currently served by american or amr eagle. the company currently estimates that the implementation of its cornerstone strategy, the implementation of the company s jba with british airways iberia and the proposed jba with jal, and various other alliance and network activities will result in incremental revenues and cost savings of over 500 million per year. the company expects that it will realize the majority of these incremental revenues and cost savings in 2011, and the remainder by year end 2012. this estimate is based on a number of assumptions that are inherently uncertain, and the company s ability to realize these benefits depends on various factors, some of which are beyond the company s control, such as obtaining certain regulatory approvals and other factors referred to above in forward looking information. the company is in active labor contract negotiations with each of its organized labor groups. the company negotiated tentative agreements with several workgroups within the transport workers union of american afl cio twu including the maintenance control technician group, the material logistics specialists group and the mechanic and related group. agreements with the twu groups are subject to ratification by the relevant membership of twu, and while the maintenance control technician group ratified their agreement, the material logistics specialists group and the mechanic and related group tentative agreements were not ratified. mediated negotiation continues under the auspices of the national mediation board with the twu, the allied pilots association apa and the association of professional flight attendants apfa . based on analysis of airline industry labor contracts, the company estimates that at the beginning of 2010, american s labor cost disadvantage the amount by which its labor costs exceed what such costs would be if they were determined based on the average of other network carrier labor contracts was approximately 600 million per year. the company expects this gap to narrow as open industry labor contracts are settled. this expectation is based on a number of assumptions, the validity of which cannot be assured. the airline industry labor contract negotiation process is inherently uncertain and the results of labor contract negotiations are difficult to predict. 13 table of contents in march of 2010, the president signed into law comprehensive health care reform legislation under the patient protection and affordable care act hr 3590 and the health care education and affordability reconciliation act hr 4872 the acts . the acts contain provisions potentially impacting the company s cost and accounting for active employee and retiree medical benefits in future periods. however, according to the recently released interim final regulations promulgated under the acts, the company s retiree medical benefits will be exempt from many of the mandates of the acts under a grandfathering provision. thus, under the company s current assessment of the cost and accounting implications of the acts, no significant impact to its financial statements is expected. in june of 2010, the company reiterated its intent to evaluate the possible divestiture of amr eagle, its wholly owned regional carrier. amr eagle owns two regional airlines american eagle airlines, inc american eagle and executive airlines, inc. executive . american eagle feeds american airlines hubs throughout north america, and its affiliate, executive, carries the american eagle name throughout the bahamas and the caribbean from bases in miami and san juan, puerto rico. no prediction can be made as to the outcome of any such evaluation, and if amr were to decide to pursue a divestiture of amr eagle, no prediction can be made as to whether any such divestiture will be completed or the impact of any such divestiture on the company. in july of 2010, president obama signed into law the dodd frank wall street reform and consumer protection act the dodd frank act . the dodd frank act is subject to significant rulemaking, and thus, the company cannot yet predict the impact of implementing its provisions. the dodd frank act contains provisions which may impact the company, but those effects cannot be predicted at this time. the company expects to be able to continue to participate in the financial markets in order to hedge fuel prices however, the costs of doing so may be increased as a result of the new legislation. on august 26, 2010, the faa proposed a 24.2 million civil penalty against american airlines, claiming that american failed to properly perform certain portions of an faa airworthiness directive concerning certain wiring to the mcdonnell douglas md 80 aircraft auxiliary hydraulic pump. american plans to challenge the proposed civil penalty. on september 10, 2010, the faa introduced a notice of proposed rulemaking nprm to change for all carriers certificated under part 121 of the federal aviation regulations the required amount and timing of rest periods for pilots between work assignments and that would modify duty and rest requirements based on the time of day, number of scheduled segments, flight types, time zones and other factors. the company is seeking clarification with the faa of certain provisions of the proposed rule changes to determine if the new requirements could have a material adverse impact on the company. the company will continue to analyze the nprm and assess the potential impact of the proposed changes, but cannot reasonably estimate the effect of the proposal at this time. the company s ability to become consistently profitable and its ability to continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis will depend on a number of factors, many of which are largely beyond the company s control. certain risk factors that affect the company s business and financial results are discussed in the risk factors listed in item 1a in the 2009 form 10 k. most of the company s largest domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have filed for bankruptcy in previous years and have used this process to significantly reduce contractual labor and other costs. also, recent mergers involving some of the largest carriers in the industry, including carriers that have recently reorganized in bankruptcy, have resulted in the formation of larger competitors with more extensive route networks. in order to remain competitive and to improve its financial condition, the company must continue to take steps to generate additional revenues and to reduce its costs. although the company has a number of initiatives underway to address its cost and revenue challenges, some of these initiatives involve changes to the company s business which it may be unable to implement. it has also become increasingly difficult to identify and implement significant revenue enhancement and cost savings initiatives. the adequacy and ultimate success of the company s initiatives to generate additional revenues and reduce costs cannot be assured. moreover, whether the company s initiatives will be adequate or successful depends in large measure on factors beyond its control, notably the overall industry environment, including passenger demand, yield and industry capacity growth, and fuel prices. it will be very difficult for the company to continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return to profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve substantially or if fuel prices were to persist at high levels for an extended period. 14 table of contents liquidity and capital resources significant indebtedness and future financing the company remains heavily indebted and has significant obligations including substantial pension funding obligations , as described more fully under item 7, management s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the company s 2009 form 10 k. indebtedness is a significant risk to the company as discussed in the risk factors listed in item 1a in the 2009 form 10 k. during the last few years, the company raised substantial financing to fund capital commitments mainly for aircraft and ground properties , debt maturities, and employee pension obligations, and to bolster its liquidity. to meet the company s commitments, to maintain sufficient liquidity and because the company has significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years, including commitments to purchase aircraft, as well as substantial pension funding obligations refer to contractual obligations in item 7, management s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the 2009 form 10 k , the company will need access to substantial additional funding. an inability to obtain necessary additional funding on acceptable terms would have a material adverse impact on the company and on its ability to sustain its operations. as of september 30, 2010, the company is required to make scheduled principal payments of approximately 254 million on long term debt and approximately 7.9 million in payments on capital leases, and the company expects to spend approximately 488 million on capital expenditures, including aircraft commitments, for the remainder of 2010. the company plans to meet these obligations and its other obligations with a combination of internally generated cash and external funding. however, the company s funding needs are subject to change due to the protracted recovery from the global economic downturn, rising fuel prices, the possibility of being required to post reserves under credit card processing agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral on fuel hedging contracts and fund pension plan contributions, among other things. these factors may in the future negatively impact the company s liquidity. the company s substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important consequences. for example, they i limit the company s ability to obtain additional funding for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, investments and general corporate purposes, and adversely affect the terms on which such funding could be obtained ii require the company to dedicate a substantial portion of its cash flow from operations to payments on its indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the funds available for other purposes iii make the company more vulnerable to economic downturns and catastrophic external events and iv limit the company s ability to withstand competitive pressures and reduce its flexibility in responding to changing business and economic conditions. the company s possible remaining financing sources primarily include i a very limited amount of additional secured aircraft debt or sale leaseback transactions involving owned aircraft ii debt secured by other assets iii securitization of future operating receipts iv the sale or monetization of certain assets v unsecured debt and vi issuance of equity or equity like securities. besides unencumbered aircraft, the company s most likely sources of liquidity include the financing of route authorities, takeoff and landing slots, spare parts, and the sale or financing of certain of amr s business units and subsidiaries, such as amr eagle. the company s ability to obtain future financing is limited by the value of its unencumbered assets. almost all of the company s aircraft assets including aircraft eligible for the benefits of section 1110 of the u.s. bankruptcy code are encumbered. also, the market value of these aircraft assets has declined in recent years, and may continue to decline. the company believes it has approximately 2 billion in assets that could be used as possible financing sources as of the date of this filing. however, many of these assets may be difficult to finance, and the availability and level of the financing sources described above cannot be assured. in july of 2010, the company entered into an amendment to purchase agreement no. 1977 with the boeing company to exercise rights to acquire additional boeing 737 800 aircraft. pursuant to the amendment, american exercised rights to purchase 35 boeing 737 800 aircraft for delivery in 2011 and 2012. in conjunction with this transaction, american has arranged for backstop financing of the additional boeing 737 800 aircraft deliveries, subject to certain terms and conditions. as of september 30, 2010, american had twelve boeing 737 800 aircraft purchase commitments for the remainder of 2010 and 43 boeing 737 800 aircraft purchase commitments in 2011 and 2012. 15 table of contents in addition to these aircraft purchase commitments, american had firm purchase commitments for eleven boeing 737 800 aircraft and seven boeing 777 aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2013 through 2016. american also previously announced plans subject to certain reconfirmation rights to acquire 42 boeing 787 9 aircraft, with the right to acquire an additional 58 boeing 787 9 aircraft. american has selected ge aviation as the exclusive provider of engines for its expected order of boeing 787 9 aircraft. as of september 30, 2010, payments for the above purchase commitments will approximate 376 million in the remainder of 2010, 707 million in 2011, 951 million in 2012, 557 million in 2013, 225 million in 2014, and 248 million for 2015 and beyond. these amounts are net of purchase deposits currently held by the manufacturers. in 2008, the company entered into a new purchase agreement with boeing for the acquisition of 42 firm boeing 787 9 aircraft and purchase rights to acquire up to 58 additional b787 aircraft. per the purchase agreement, the first such aircraft was scheduled to be delivered in 2012, and the last firm aircraft was scheduled to be delivered in 2018 with deliveries of additional aircraft, if any, scheduled between 2015 and 2020. in july 2010, the company and boeing agreed upon a revised delivery schedule due to the impact of the overall boeing 787 program delay on american s delivery positions. the first aircraft is currently scheduled to be delivered in 2014, and the last firm aircraft is scheduled to be delivered in 2018 with deliveries of additional aircraft, if any, scheduled between 2016 and 2021. additionally, the revised delivery schedule includes terms and conditions consistent with the original agreement and allows the company the confirmation rights described below. under the current 787 9 purchase agreement, except as described below, american will not be obligated to purchase a 787 9 aircraft unless it gives boeing notice confirming its election to do so at least 18 months prior to the scheduled delivery date for that aircraft. if american does not give that notice with respect to an aircraft, the aircraft will no longer be subject to the 787 9 purchase agreement. these confirmation rights may be exercised until a specified date, may 1, 2014 under the current agreement, provided that those rights will terminate earlier if american reaches a collective bargaining agreement with its pilots union that includes provisions enabling american to utilize the 787 9 to american s satisfaction in the operations desired by american, or if american confirms its election to purchase any of the initial 42 787 9 aircraft. while there can be no assurances, american expects that it will have reached an agreement as described above with its pilots union prior to the first notification date. in either of those events, american would become obligated to purchase all of the initial 42 aircraft then subject to the purchase agreement. if neither of those events occurs prior to may 1, 2014 under the current agreement, then on that date american may elect to purchase all of the initial 42 aircraft then subject to the purchase agreement, and if it does not elect to do so, the purchase agreement will terminate in its entirety. the company s continued aircraft replacement strategy, and its execution of that strategy, will depend on such factors as future economic and industry conditions and the financial condition of the company. credit card processing and other reserves american has agreements with a number of credit card companies and processors to accept credit cards for the sale of air travel and other services. under certain of these agreements, the related credit card processor may hold back a reserve from american s credit card receivables following the occurrence of certain events, including the failure of american to maintain certain levels of liquidity as specified in each agreement . under such agreements, the amount of the reserve that may be required generally is based on the processor s exposure to the company under the applicable agreement and, in the case a reserve is required because of american s failure to maintain a certain level of liquidity, the amount of such liquidity. as of september 30, 2010, the company was not required to maintain any reserve under such agreements. if circumstances were to occur that would allow the credit card processor to require the company to maintain a reserve, the company s liquidity would be negatively impacted. 16 table of contents pension funding obligation the company is required to make minimum contributions to its defined benefit pension plans under the minimum funding requirements of erisa, the pension funding equity act of 2004 and the pension protection act of 2006. in june of 2010, president obama signed the relief act into law. the relief act provides for temporary, targeted funding relief subject to certain terms and conditions for single employer and multiemployer pension plans that suffered significant losses in asset value due to the steep market slide in 2008. under the relief act, the company s 2010 minimum contribution to its defined benefit pension plans was reduced from 525 million to approximately 460 million, which has been completed as of the date of this filing. the company estimates its 2011 minimum required contribution to its defined benefit pension plans to be approximately 520 million. this estimate is subject to change based on final plan asset values as of december 31, 2010. cash flow activity at september 30, 2010, the company had 4.5 billion in unrestricted cash and short term investments, which is an increase of 159 million from the balance as of december 31, 2009. net cash provided by operating activities in the nine month period ended september 30, 2010 was 953 million, which was comparable to 779 million over the same period in 2009, which reflects an improved operating environment in 2010. the company made scheduled debt and capital lease payments of 645 million and invested 1.2 million in capital expenditures in the first nine months of 2010. capital expenditures primarily consisted of new aircraft and certain aircraft modifications. during the nine months ended september 30, 2010, the company entered into previously arranged loans of approximately 215 million secured by various aircraft. the company also entered into 901 million of previously announced sale leaseback financings of certain aircraft. in the past, the company has from time to time refinanced, redeemed or repurchased its debt and taken other steps to reduce its debt or lease obligations or otherwise improve its balance sheet. going forward, depending on market conditions, its cash positions and other considerations, the company may continue to take such actions. war risk insurance the u.s. government has agreed to provide commercial war risk insurance for u.s. based airlines through december 31, 2010, covering losses to employees, passengers, third parties and aircraft. if the u.s. government were to cease providing such insurance in whole or in part, it is likely that the company could obtain comparable coverage in the commercial market, but the company would incur substantially higher premiums and more restrictive terms. there can be no assurance that comparable war risk coverage will be available in the commercial market. if the company is unable to obtain adequate war risk coverage at commercially reasonable rates, the company would be adversely affected. 17 table of contents results of operations for the nine months ended september 30, 2010 and 2009 revenues the company s revenues increased approximately 1.7 billion, or 11.7 percent, to 16.6 billion in the first nine months of 2010 from the same period last year. american s passenger revenues increased by 11.8 percent, or 1.3 billion, on essentially static capacity available seat mile asm . american s passenger load factor increased 1.5 points to 82.0 percent while passenger yield increased by 9.5 percent to 13.30 cents. this resulted in an increase in passenger revenue per available seat mile rasm of 11.5 percent to 10.91 cents. following is additional information regarding american s domestic and international rasm and capacity nine months ended september 30, 2010 rasm y o y asms y o y cents change billions change dot domestic 10.79 10.1 70.1 0.0 international 11.09 13.8 45.1 0.6 dot latin america 11.56 8.5 22.0 2.2 dot atlantic 10.77 20.5 17.7 2.9 dot pacific 10.23 15.4 5.4 7.0 the company s regional affiliates include two of amr s wholly owned subsidiaries, american eagle airlines, inc. and executive airlines, inc. collectively, amr eagle , and an independent carrier with which american has a capacity purchase agreement, chautauqua airlines, inc. chautauqua . regional affiliates passenger revenues, which are based on industry standard proration agreements for flights connecting to american flights, increased 223 million, or 14.9 percent, to 1.7 billion as a result of higher yield and increased traffic. regional affiliates traffic increased 4.0 percent to 6.4 billion revenue passenger miles rpms , on a capacity increase of 3.2 percent to 9.0 billion asms, resulting in approximately a one half point increase in the passenger load factor to 71.9 percent. other revenues increased 6.0 percent, or 102 million, to 1.8 billion due to increases in baggage and aadvantage partner revenues. 18 table of contents operating expenses the company s total operating expenses increased 5.6 percent, or 869 million, to 16.4 billion in the nine months of 2010 compared to the same period in 2009. the company s operating expenses per asm increased 5.1 percent to 12.56 cents compared to the nine months ended september 30, 2009. these increases are due primarily to increased fuel prices in 2010 compared to 2009. nine months ended in millions september 30, change percentage operating expenses 2010 from 2009 change wages, salaries and benefits 4,683 38 0.8 aircraft fuel 4,258 562 15.2 a regional payments to amr eagle 1,645 162 10.9 b other rentals and landing fees 956 41 4.5 maintenance, materials and repairs 822 60 7.9 c depreciation and amortization 696 18 2.5 commissions, booking fees and credit card expense 739 93 14.4 d aircraft rentals 430 46 12.0 food service 365 0 0.0 special charges 100 100.0 other operating expenses 1,848 15 0.8 total operating expenses 16,442 869 5.6 a aircraft fuel expense increased primarily due to a 16.4 percent increase in the company s price per gallon of fuel net of the impact of fuel hedging . the company recorded 123 million and 518 million in net losses on its fuel hedging contracts for the nine months ended september 30, 2010 and september 30, 2009, respectively. b regional payments to amr eagle expense increased in conjunction with the 14.9 percent increase in regional affiliates passenger revenue. c maintenance, materials and repairs increased due to the timing of materials and repairs expenses. d commissions, booking fees and credit card expense increased 14.4 percent primarily in conjunction with the 11.7 percent increase in the company s revenues. other income expense interest income decreased 6 million due to decreased interest rates. interest expense increased 79 million as a result of an increase in the company s long term debt balance. income tax the company did not record a net tax provision benefit associated with its loss for the nine months ending september 30, 2010 or september 30, 2009 due to the company providing a valuation allowance, as discussed in note 4 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. in 2009, the company recorded an income tax expense credit of approximately 29 million resulting from the company s election under section 3081 of the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 as extended by section 1201 b of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , allowing corporations a refund of certain research and alternative minimum tax amt credit carryforwards in lieu of applicable bonus depreciation on certain qualifying capital investments. 19 table of contents regional affiliates the following table summarizes the combined capacity purchase activity for the american connection carriers and amr eagle for the nine months ended september 30, 2010 and 2009 in millions nine months ended september 30, 2010 2009 revenues regional affiliates 1,716 1,493 other 112 102 1,828 1,595 expenses regional payments 1,692 1,575 other incurred expenses 275 260 1,967 1,835 in addition, passengers connecting to american s flights from american connection and amr eagle flights generated passenger revenues for american flights of 1.3 billion and 1.1 billion in the first nine months of 2010 and 2009, respectively, which are included in revenues passenger in the consolidated statements of operations. outlook the company currently expects capacity for american s mainline jet operations to increase by approximately 3.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2010 versus the fourth quarter of 2009. american s mainline capacity for the full year 2010 is expected to increase approximately one percent from 2009. the company plans to continue to exercise capacity discipline in 2011, and mainline capacity is expected to increase approximately 3.5 percent from 2010, predominantly in international markets. the company expects fourth quarter 2010 mainline unit costs to decrease approximately 3.5 percent year over year. full year mainline unit costs are expected to increase approximately three percent in 2010 compared to 2009 due to higher fuel costs recorded in 2010 compared to 2009, higher revenue related expenses such as booking fees and commissions and financing costs related to boeing 737 800 and other aircraft deliveries. the company s results are significantly affected by the price of jet fuel, which is in turn affected by a number of factors beyond the company s control. although fuel prices have abated considerably from the record high prices recorded in july 2008, they have steadily increased since 2009 and remain high and extremely volatile by historical standards. in addition, industry wide capacity may increase as the economy continues to recover from the global recession. if industry capacity increases and if consumer demand does not continue to pace those increases, the company, and the airline industry as a whole, could be negatively impacted. 20 table of contents 