item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk. we are exposed to market risk primarily from changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange risks. interest rate risk fluctuations in the general level of interest rates on our current and future fixed and variable rate debt obligations expose us to market risk. we are vulnerable to significant fluctuations in interest rates on our variable rate debt and on any future refinancing of our fixed rate debt and on future debt. at december 31, 2006, we were exposed to interest rate fluctuations on approximately 8.1 million of bank loans carrying variable interest rates. a hypothetical one hundred basis point increase in interest rates for these notes payable would increase our annual interest expense by approximately 81,000. due to the uncertainty of fluctuations in interest rates and the specific actions that might be taken by us to mitigate the impact of such fluctuations and their possible effects, the foregoing sensitivity analysis assumes no changes in our financial structure. we have also been subject to interest rate market risk for short term invested cash and cash equivalents. the principal of such invested funds would not be subject to fluctuating value because of their highly liquid short term nature. as of december 31, 2006, we had 28.3 million invested in short term maturing investments. 47 table of contents foreign currency exchange rate risk we have designated the u.s. dollar as the functional currency for our operations in international locations as we contract with customers, purchase equipment and finance capital using the u.s. dollar. local currency transaction gains and losses, arising from remeasurement of certain assets and liabilities denominated in local currency, are included in our consolidated statements of income. for the year ended december 31, 2006, we had a net foreign exchange loss of 515,000 relating to our dls operations. we conduct business in mexico through our mexican partner, matyep. this business exposes us to foreign exchange risk. to control this risk, we provide for payment in u.s. dollars. 