begin privacy enhanced message proc type 2001,mic clear originator name webmaster www.sec.gov originator key asymmetric mfgwcgyevqgbaqicaf8dsgawrwjaw2snkk9avtbzyzmr6agjlwyk3xmzv3dtinen twsm7vrzladbmyqaionwg5sdw3p6oam5d3tdezxmm7z1t b twidaqab mic info rsa md5,rsa, ja4fugye1ark1 ulhuv 75n2mbs6vf3pbnf51kgynxanoyyuqp9jofh9yi6brb t0e2xlnnkhhm3hslm8eatw 0000006260 97 000011.txt 19971230 0000006260 97 000011.hdr.sgml 19971230 accession number 0000006260 97 000011 conformed submission type 10 k public document count 4 conformed period of report 19970930 filed as of date 19971229 sros nasd filer company data company conformed name anacomp inc central index key 0000006260 standard industrial classification photographic equipment supplies 3861 irs number 351144230 state of incorporation in fiscal year end 0930 filing values form type 10 k sec act sec file number 001 08328 film number 97745094 business address street 1 11550 n meridian st suite 600 city carmel state in zip 46032 business phone 3178449666 mail address street 1 po box 40888 city indianapolis state in zip 46240 former company former conformed name computec inc date of name change 19740314 10 k 1 form 10 k for period ending 3 30 97 united states securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549 form 10 k annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 for fiscal year ended september 30, 1997 commission file number 1 8328 anacomp, inc. exact name of registrant as specified in its charter indiana 35 1144230 state of incorporation irs employer identification no. 11550 north meridian street, p.o. box 40888 indianapolis, indiana 46240 address of principal executive offices zip code registrant's telephone number, including area code 317 844 9666 securities registered pursuant to section 12 b of the act none securities registered pursuant to section 12 g of the act title of each class common stock, .01 par value common stock warrants indicate by check mark whether the registrant 1 has filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months, and 2 has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes x no indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed all reports required to be filed by section 12, 13 or 15 d of the securities and exchange act of 1934 subsequent to the distribution of securities under a plan confirmed by a court. yes x no indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10 k, or any amendment to this form 10 k. x the aggregate market value of voting stock held by non affiliates of the registrant as of december 19, 1997 common stock par value .01 per share, 215,202,312. common stock outstanding as of december 19, 1997 was 13,828,261 shares. documents incorporated by reference portions of the definitive proxy statement relating to the registrant's 1998 annual meeting of shareholders to be held on february 10, 1998, have been incorporated by reference in part iii of this annual report on form 10 k. part i item 1. business overview anacomp, inc. anacomp or the company is a leading provider of products and services that enable organizations to effectively and efficiently manage their documents. the company does business with approximately 15,000 customers in more than 65 countries. the company offers a broad range of short term and long term solutions for the conversion, storage, and retrieval of computer data and images utilizing micrographic, magnetic media and, to an increasing extent, electronic technologies. anacomp has built a strong reputation as the world's leading full service provider of film based micrographic systems, services, and supplies. micrographics is the conversion of information stored in electronic form or on paper to microfilm or microfiche. traditionally, micrographics has provided one of the most cost effective means of data storage and retrieval for information intensive organizations such as banks, insurance companies, financial service companies, retailers, healthcare providers and government agencies. anacomp's primary micrographics focus is computer output to microfilm com solutions, and the company believes it possesses worldwide com market share in excess of 40 . com involves the high speed conversion of coded data directly from a computer or magnetic tape to microfilm or microfiche. the company has an extensive installed base of com equipment, which management estimates to be in excess of 55 of the systems in use worldwide. this installed base, together with the company's strong customer relationships, provide the company with what management believes to be a substantial recurring revenue stream from com maintenance and supplies. for customers that prefer outsourcing solutions, the company provides com services through its network of 42 service centers in the united states and six international centers. the company has established itself as a leading provider of compact disc cd solutions for document management applications through the growth of its alva tm cd alva services as well as the company's acquisition in 1997 of data ware development, inc. data ware , a leading manufacturer and supplier of cd output systems. cd services are offered at a majority of the company's service centers around the world, and this business has enjoyed healthy growth over the past two years. the company's data ware cd systems generally are sold to businesses with high volume cd output needs. the company believes it can enhance sales of data ware cd systems by leveraging its customer relationships and capital equipment expertise. the company is a leading provider of half inch computer tape magnetic media products for larger computing systems, with manufacturing plants in the united states and in europe. to at least partially offset the mature market trends for many of the magnetic media products, the company plans to invest in technology to assemble newer generation metal particle tape cartridges and to significantly increase the magnetic media related services it offers to customers. overall, the company plans to maintain its leadership position in traditional information management solutions while continuing to capitalize on its expertise and customer base to add new products and services. this migration toward faster growth areas of the document management industry is being accomplished through internal product development, strategic alliances and acquisitions of companies and technology. history recent developments anacomp was incorporated in indiana in 1968. in the 1970s and 1980s, anacomp became the leader in the com services portion of the document management industry through acquisitions and internal growth. in 1987, the company became the world's leading manufacturer of com systems by acquiring datagraphix, inc. in 1988, anacomp acquired xidex corporation xidex , a leading manufacturer of magnetic media products, duplicate microfilm, and microfilm readers and reader printers. primarily due to substantial debt incurred as a result of the xidex acquisition, the company filed for bankruptcy protection under chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code on january 5, 1996. the company emerged from chapter 11 under its plan of reorganization on june 4, 1996 with significantly reduced debt, lower interest payments, a new financial structure, a new board of directors and management and a new business strategy. subsequent to the company's emergence from chapter 11, the company has refinanced both its senior and subordinated debt, further reducing its annual cash interest payments and enhancing the company's liquidity. recently, in addition to enhancing its traditional micrographics products and services, the company has significantly expanded its electronic document management solutions. initiatives include the development of alva services the acquisition of cd businesses, including data ware and com informatic ag com informatic , a leading swiss developer and installer of computer output to laser disc cold and imaging digital solutions reseller agreements for the distribution of foldering, report distribution, cold, and imaging solutions and the acquisition of cambridge technology group, inc. cambridge technology , developers of a leading software application for the trust custody financial market. document management industry anacomp operates within the document management industry, which the company believes to be in excess of 8 billion worldwide. industry suppliers provide products and services used in the conversion, storage, and retrieval of computer data and images. users of these solutions must balance the ease of accessibility of information with the cost of storing and accessing that information. this balancing and the company's industry strategy adheres to a paradigm known as the information delivery life cycle, which describes the relationship between the age of information, the frequency and speed of access, and the type of media upon which the information is stored. in general, as information ages, customer requirements for frequency of retrieval and speed of delivery decline. to achieve the greatest degree of cost effectiveness and efficiency, organizations migrate their information across several different delivery systems over the life of the information. graph is not available generally, newly created information is the most frequently accessed, requiring a high speed storage media such as magnetic disk i.e., dasd . as the information begins to age, it often is first migrated to optical disk or cd, which offers high storage capacity and quick access to information at a lower cost than dasd. as the need to access information becomes more infrequent, the information often is next migrated to magnetic tape, an even lower cost media that provides somewhat slower, yet readily accessible, information delivery. once information moves to an archival stage in its life cycle, it is often migrated to microfilm or microfiche, which offers very low storage costs for both archival and non archival applications. anacomp's array of products and services is designed to help organizations optimize how they store, deliver, and migrate their information across this entire life cycle. the company believes that vendor consolidation and a gradual shift toward integrated solutions will favor suppliers that can provide a broad, technologically advanced suite of products and services across the entire cycle. the company also believes that this market will continue to favor suppliers with a fully developed domestic and international infrastructure that allows them to serve large customers and to benefit from economies of scale. additionally, competitive pressures on organizations served by anacomp have steadily increased the demand for outsourcing services. concerns over technology obsolescence, the sometimes high capital cost of information management systems, and a general recognition of the benefits of outside expertise have induced many companies to reduce in house expenditures on certain operations in favor of third party service providers. through outsourcing, companies are able to avoid the capital requirements of proprietary document management and storage systems and maintain flexibility to migrate their information as new products and technologies become available. anacomp believes this trend toward outsourcing should have a positive impact on many of the output services offered by the company. moreover, the company seeks to differentiate itself from other service providers through feature rich offerings, high levels of customer service, and value added consulting services. traditionally, film based imaging solutions micrographics and particularly com have provided the most cost effective means of document storage and retrieval for information intensive organizations such as banks, insurance companies, financial service companies, retailers, healthcare providers, and government agencies. however, the continued expansion of computer technology to users' desktops has resulted in the development of many viable electronic alternatives to micrographics, particularly for applications that require frequent document access. the company believes that many organizations will continue to migrate to electronic solutions for active records management, but that over the next few years micrographics technology will continue to be competitive in a wide range of applications. over a longer term, the company believes micrographics technology will be viewed predominately as a reliable and cost effective method for long term storage. the company's primary business strategy is to capitalize on these trends by leveraging its document management expertise and its competitive strengths to provide newer electronic products and services, while maintaining its leading market position in com solutions as well as magnetic media products and services. in addition, the company plans to expand its consulting and professional services to better assist its customers in developing tailored document management and migration strategies. competitive strengths strong customer relationships since its inception, anacomp has developed long term relationships in excess of five years with many of its customers. among the company's current long term customers are aetna inc., at t corp., automatic data processing, inc., bankamerica corporation, citicorp, daimler benz ag, deutsche bank ag, electronic data systems corporation, fmr corp., general electric capital corporation, ibm, eastman kodak company, and travelers group inc. the terms of the contractual relationships with these customers vary however, they typically provide for minimum quantities, pricing structure, terms of one or more years, and automatic renewal. no single customer accounted for 10 or more of the company's revenues in fiscal 1997. the company believes that the strength of its customer relationships results from consistently meeting or exceeding its customers' document management needs and expectations. the company manages these customer relationships through a worldwide sales force of approximately 200 individuals as well as extensive distributor networks. leading market shares within the document management industry worldwide, the company believes that it is the largest manufacturer and distributor of com systems the largest provider of com maintenance services and supplies the second largest provider of com services the largest manufacturer of half inch computer tape products and the largest provider of cd output solutions. the company believes that its market position and customer base provides the necessary platform to introduce new and complementary information management products and services. installed base of equipment the company believes it has the world's largest installed base of com equipment, with an estimated market share of 55 . in addition, the company has a significant installed base of data ware cd systems. these installed bases, together with the company's strong customer relationships, provide the company with what it believes to be substantial recurring revenues from maintenance services and supplies sales. broad product offering in recent times, the company has introduced new products and services in order to create a broad product offering across the entire information life cycle. in addition to enhancing its traditional com products through innovations such as dragoncom tm , a modified com system capable of processing asian languages, and image direct tm , a software enhancement for processing images , the company has become a premier provider of cd output solutions through the development of alva cd services and the acquisition of data ware cd systems. the company also plans to expand and introduce complementary services related to its existing offerings, including archival storage services and magnetic media related services. experienced management team the company's relatively new senior management team is led by ralph w. koehrer, who became the company's president in january 1997 and chief executive officer in may 1997. this management team has more than 300 cumulative years of experience in the document management industry and is highly committed to executing the company's new business strategy. as the company evolves, it continues to recruit managers from other highly successful companies and to promote from within where appropriate. products and services anacomp operates in a single industry generally known as document management, and it offers a wide range of products and services within this industry. these solutions can be grouped into five major families output services, output systems, technical services, micrographics supplies, and magnetic media. the table below shows anacomp's revenues for each of these product families for the last three fiscal years. the information is presented on a traditional comparative basis for the year ended september 30, 1996 and 1995, to facilitate a meaningful comparison to fiscal year 1997. consequently, the fiscal 1996 and 1995 information presented below does not comply with accounting requirements for companies upon emergence from bankruptcy, which calls for separate reporting for the newly reorganized company and the predecessor company. year ended september 30, 1997 1996 1995 dollars in thousands output services 103,595 22 103,733 21 132,144 22 technical services 77,123 17 82,105 17 86,175 15 output systems 36,739 8 32,794 7 51,276 9 micrographics supplies 131,615 29 150,449 31 190,621 32 magnetic media 102,823 22 112,187 23 128,353 22 other 10,615 2 4,872 1 2,620 462,510 100 486,140 100 591,189 100 output services the principal output services delivered by anacomp are com services and alva cd services, which are delivered through the company's 48 service centers throughout the world. output services are sold by anacomp's direct sales forces in the united states, canada, and europe. the company recently has acquired or started several small com and cd service centers as part of its strategy to increase its market share in specific locations and in the maturing com services business. the company also has introduced, on a modest basis, archival and print mail services. the company has a large base of output services customers that has proved to be loyal to the company in the past. clients include banks, insurance companies, financial service companies, retailers, healthcare providers, and government agencies. no one customer accounted for more than 10 of the company's output services revenues in fiscal 1997. the typical service contract is exclusive, lasts one year with a one year automatic renewal period, and provides for usage based monthly fees, subject to increase on 30 days' notice. the company believes that approximately 75 of the company's com services customers are subject to contracts and that approximately 90 of these contracts are renewed annually. competition for output services customers traditionally has been limited to service companies with operations within a 50 mile radius of a customer, partially because most customers have required that their information usually stored on computer tape be physically picked up by the service provider and partially because of the desire for rapid turnaround of the output media. this traditional model may be changing, however, with the advent of readily available data transmission capabilities and the increased usage of electronic desktop delivery solutions for quick turnaround needs. anacomp and first image management company first image which the company believes has approximately 50 output service centers in the united states are the two largest national output services providers. the remainder of the market is served by regional or local output service centers. com services. com services, the delivery of micrographics outsourcing services, represents the largest component of anacomp's output services. the company believes that com services providers processed over 45 billion images in 1995, generating over 350 million in revenues. the company believes it holds an estimated 25 to 30 market share, second only to first image. on a daily basis, anacomp's service centers receive thousands of computer tapes and, increasingly, electronic downloads from customers. this information both text and graphics is converted to 16mm microfilm or to microfiche, which is a four by six inch film medium capable of storing up to 1,000 pages of computer output. turnaround for a typical com services job ranges from two hours to 36 hours, depending on specific circumstances and requirements, and the centers generally operate 24 hours a day every day of the year. in response to a gradual decline in the market for com services and a more competitive market, in fiscal 1995 the company completed installation of xfp2000 com systems in all of its service centers, increasing the efficiency of com production. additionally, the company has upgraded many of these systems with anacomp developed emulation software for ibm and xerox laser print streams, expanding the potential market for com services and resulting in higher average prices than for other com output. as an adjunct to com services, anacomp also provides external facilities management xfm services to selected customers. under an xfm arrangement, anacomp operates and manages a customer's com production at anacomp's facilities. alva cd services. although still a relatively small percentage of the company's revenues, anacomp quickly has become a significant provider of digital output services since entering this emerging market in fiscal 1995. competition in this industry is highly fragmented, and anacomp believes it is the second largest u.s. provider of cd output services. anacomp's cd services provide customers with a high capacity storage and delivery solution for applications requiring frequent, high speed information retrieval. customer documents, such as invoices and statements, are indexed and stored on recordable compact discs known as cd recordable or cd r discs. in addition to indexed cd output, alva also includes sophisticated windows nt based software for accessing and retrieving the data. alva is available at the majority of the company's service centers in the united states and at selected locations internationally. the company believes that its alva solution has significant advantages over competing products, primarily due to the company's network of service centers, its extensive knowledge of applications and indexing expertise, and alva's flexible and easy to use user interface. in addition, anacomp's acquisition of data ware provides an opportunity for the company to create a best of breed product that further extends alva's value in the marketplace. archival and print mail services. anacomp provides archival storage services at several of its service centers in the united states, providing for the long term storage of original microfilmed records for its com services customers. the media is stored in a secure vault within the facility, providing customers with a convenient and safe method of off site storage of critical business records. in addition, anacomp offers customers the ability to retrieve their records on an as needed basis. anacomp also offers the storage of other media including paper and computer tape at an underground, climate controlled storage vault in massachusetts acquired in october 1996 from archive storage, inc. as a result of this acquisition, the company also acquired expertise in records management and disaster recovery consulting services, which helps customers ensure they are storing the right information on the most cost effective media for the appropriate periods of time. anacomp offers limited print mail services for paper documents such as invoices and statements to its customers through a company owned print and mail service center in europe as well as through relationships with third party providers. the company does not believe it has significant market shares in either archival storage services or print mail services. technical services anacomp provides round the clock maintenance services through approximately 400 highly trained service employees in the united states, canada, and europe. internationally, some of these services may be provided by employees of the company's distributors. the company believes that it maintains virtually all of its own installed base of com systems, as well as a large percentage of com systems built by other companies. in addition, the company provides maintenance services for other micrographics related devices and, increasingly, non micrographics equipment. since many customers tend to use the maintenance services of the supplier that installed the system, maintenance revenues traditionally have been a function of new com system sales and the size of the installed base. anacomp believes that its com maintenance market share is approximately 65 in the united states, 50 in europe, and 15 in the americas excluding the united states and asia. as sales of com systems mature, the company's strategy is to leverage its maintenance infrastructure by expanding the technical services it provides for non micrographics equipment. recent additions to the company's maintenance base include tape drives and automated tape libraries, tape cleaning and conversion equipment, and optical storage systems jukeboxes . the company added maintenance of high speed laser printers to its offering with the acquisition of a small laser printer maintenance provider in december 1997. recently, the company has identified professional and consulting services as potential growth areas. the company's business strategy calls for professional services to be offered as an adjunct to company provided products and services and for consulting services to be a stand alone business offering customers a sophisticated level of guidance about document management strategies and solutions. output systems the principal output systems products delivered by anacomp are com systems cd systems and cold, imaging, and report distribution software. the company sells these products through its direct sales forces in the united states, canada, and europe and through distributors in latin america, europe, and asia. no single customer accounted for more than 10 of the company's output system sales in fiscal 1997. com systems. anacomp is the world's leading manufacturer and distributor of com systems, offering a complete line of com recorders, duplicators, sorters, and related software. anacomp's installed base of com systems, approximately 55 of those in use worldwide, is more than twice as large as its nearest competitor, and related sales of com services and supplies to the installed base provide significant recurring revenues. the company's xfp2000 is the most advanced com recorder on the market and has enabled the company to capture what it believes to be an estimated 57 of all new com systems sold or leased. the xfp2000 is faster and more reliable than previous com recorders and, through its laser technology, has the capability to generate precise reproductions of any image. the company sold or leased 135 new and used xfp2000 systems in fiscal 1997, compared to 122 systems in fiscal 1996. in fiscal 1996, anacomp introduced dragoncom, a version of the xfp2000 for the asian market, which is capable of processing chinese, korean, taiwanese, japanese and other ideographic languages utilizing the popular ibm afp architecture. the company is marketing dragoncom to customers in asia through an agreement with the asia pacific region of the eastman kodak company kodak . through the end of fiscal 1997, kodak had purchased 11 dragoncom systems and had a remaining commitment to purchase 39 additional dragoncom systems over the next three years. anacomp also has developed and currently markets several software enhancements to the xfp2000, including products that emulate ibm and xerox laser print streams. afp software, developed in conjunction with ibm, enables the xfp2000 to process and image afp formatted data streams used by ibm high speed mainframe laser printers. xcf software, developed in partnership with xerox corporation, enables the xfp2000 to process the same data stream used by xerox high speed, high volume laser printers. in addition, anacomp recently introduced its image direct application for the xfp2000, which enables users to output document images directly to microfilm from desktop workstations. the initial release of image direct supports tiff images, the most popular bitmap format in use today additional format compatibility is expected in future releases. principal customers for the company's com systems include information intensive organizations such as banks, insurance companies, financial service companies, retailers, healthcare providers, and government agencies, as well as non anacomp com service centers. while the majority of com systems are sold outright, customers are increasingly selecting leasing plans and monthly usage options. in international markets, the company sells com systems through wholly owned operating subsidiaries and, in countries in which the company does not have a subsidiary, through dealers and agents. in 1994, kodak became the company's exclusive distributor in asia other than japan and australia.. international sales accounted for approximately 52 of the company's fiscal 1997 com system revenues, with sales in asia, germany and france accounting for approximately 17 , 10 and 10 , respectively however, no single country was responsible for 10 or more of the company's total revenues in fiscal 1997. the company's primary competitors in the sale of com systems are agfa gevaert ag agfa and micrographic technology corporation. the company believes that it sells approximately 57 of all new com systems sold worldwide, including those sold through its oem arrangement with kodak. competition is based principally on product features, as well as on such factors as product quality, service, and price. the company's large installed base is an important competitive advantage in the sale of new com systems, because changing from one manufacturer's com system to another is difficult due to software conversion and operator training costs. cd systems. anacomp became a leading provider of cd output systems for mainframe and client server computer environments through its acquisition in fiscal 1997 of data ware. the company's flagship data ware products, the enterprise authoring system eas and the server enterprise authoring system s eas , provide companies with in house solutions for the highly automated output of documents to cds. the company's cd output systems are sold by its direct sales force worldwide and also by distributors in europe, latin america, and asia. because of the similarity between the company's cd and com systems relating to target markets, applications, and sales cycle, the company believes it can leverage its extensive com knowledge and customer relationships to increase sales of cd systems. in addition, the company intends to begin maintenance services for its data ware cd systems, creating a recurring revenue stream for installed units. the company's primary competitors in the sale of high volume cd output systems are young minds, inc., rimage corporation, and, to a lesser extent, kodak. kodak's product primarily competes in mid range applications. in the high volume cd system market, the company believes that it and young minds have the largest market shares. the company also has a significant installed base of cd output systems. electronic delivery solutions. anacomp is working actively to bring to market a wide range of electronic delivery solutions. the company provides cold and imaging solutions through its recent acquisition of com informatic the leading com services provider in switzerland and also a developer of advanced cold and imaging products as well as through a reseller arrangement in the united states. the company also markets an integrated system for document management which is sourced from a third party under the brand names folders and eos an acronym for enterprise output systems . launched by the company in 1995, folders and eos provide document management solutions for mainframe host computing environments that allow organizations with significant document access requirements to expedite retrieval regardless of the document's location. as the name indicates, folders is software that creates electronic document folders, allowing users to organize and store electronic documents. eos provides for the storage and distribution of electronically generated reports often voluminous , thereby enabling users to avoid paper storage of such reports and to distribute all or selected portions of reports throughout an organization. in addition, the company recently purchased cambridge technology, developers of spar tm securities, processing, accounting and reporting , an advanced securities related accounting software application for the international trust custody market. the company believes that it can increase sales of spar by leveraging its global sales and support infrastructure as well as its extensive experience and contacts with financial customers. the company plans to purchase other software applications synergistic with its current business as opportunities arise. although there are numerous competitors providing a variety of electronic delivery solutions, the company believes it can be among the first to offer a complete range of solutions both analog and digital that address all of a customer's document management needs. micrographics supplies anacomp sells the most comprehensive line of micrographics supplies in the world, including original silver halide film, duplicate film, chemicals for microfilm processing, paper and toners for reader printers, micrographics lamps and bulbs, and other consumables. these products are sold through anacomp's direct sales forces and through distributor channels. the company also markets a complete line of microfilm microfiche readers. many of these products have become only marginally profitable in recent years. to increase profitability, the company signed an agreement to outsource the manufacture of readers and reader printers beginning in fiscal 1996 as demand and margins for these products continued to decline. additionally, the company ceased production of its ds 300 reader scanner in fiscal 1996 after completing a build out of inventory. these decisions resulted in a significant one time write off in fiscal 1995. however, the company continues to offer these types of products to its customers on a reseller basis. the company supplies proprietary wet and dry original halide film used in its xfp series of com systems and proprietary wet and dry original halide film for its x series, an earlier generation of anacomp com systems. all original microfilm for the company's com systems is manufactured for the company by kodak under an exclusive supply agreement in what the company considers to be a proprietary package. the company believes it can maintain its market share of xfp2000 film sales going forward because of the complexity of the manufacturing process, the company's patents on its proprietary canister, and the industry's interest in other segments of the film business. anacomp is the world's largest supplier of duplicate microfilm, which is used to create one or more additional copies of original microfiche and microfilm masters. the company believes that its share of this estimated 75 million worldwide market is approximately 67 , which includes sales to its own output centers. anacomp's primary competitor in the duplicate microfilm market is rexham graphics ltd. rexham , with an estimated 25 share of the worldwide duplicate film market. for fiscal 1997, the company believes that kodak accounted for approximately 32 and first image accounted for approximately 12 of the company's shipments of duplicate microfilm. the company sells original microfilm for anacomp's com systems and for other manufacturers' com systems, with film sold for anacomp's systems representing the vast majority of original microfilm sales. the company competes in sales of non proprietary original com microfilms with other manufacturers, including agfa, fuji photo film u.s.a., inc. fuji , kodak, and imation corporation imation , formerly part of 3m. for non oem sales of the xfp2000, the company is the exclusive supplier of original microfilm because of the proprietary nature of the canister in which the film is placed. anacomp believes that it sells its consumable supplies directly to more than 90 of its worldwide installed base. in fiscal 1996, the company acquired the assets of one of its competitors, com products, inc. cpi , providing the company with a more diverse customer base. in fiscal 1997, the company acquired the assets of comstor technology, inc., a provider of spare parts, refurbished com systems, and supplies for the com marketplace. international sales in fiscal 1997 accounted for 43 of the company's total micrographics supplies revenues. in international markets, the company offers supplies through wholly owned operating subsidiaries and, in countries in which the company does not have a subsidiary, through a network of distributors. anacomp believes that it has an estimated 33 of the micrographics supplies market in europe and an estimated 39 of the supplies market in the americas excluding the united states and asia. in europe, the company's primary competitors for micrographics supplies and equipment are the kalle microfilm division of hoechst ag, a. messerli ag, and rexham. its primary competitors in japan are kodak and fuji. magnetic media anacomp manufactures, sells, and distributes a broad range of magnetic media products such as open reel tape 3480, 3490e, and 3590 tape cartridges dlt tape cartridges tk 50 52 compactape quarter inch, 4mm, and 8mm back up tape cartridges and voice logging and instrumentation tape. the company is the world's largest manufacturer of chromium dioxide half inch tape products open reel tape, 3480, 3490e, and tk 50 52 , widely used by organizations for the near line and off line storage of business data. these products are manufactured at company facilities in graham, texas and brynmawr, wales. the company is developing partnerships to enable it to participate in the next generation of magnetic media products, particularly half inch metal particle tape 3590 cartridges , and it plans to make modest investments in this area. the company also plans to expand the magnetic media services it offers to its customers such services include labeling, initialization, library planning, media cleaning and conversion, and disaster recovery. anacomp sells its magnetics products through a worldwide distributor network and, to a lesser extent, through parts of the company's direct sales force. the company markets these products under the memorex, dysan, graham, and storagemaster brand names, and it also is a leading oem for many of the magnetic media products it manufactures. the company has leading manufacturing and market shares for the products it makes. the company has no significant competitors with respect to the manufacture of open reel tape, and its worldwide manufacturing and market shares for 3480 and 3490e cartridges are estimated at 38 and 35 , respectively. the company's major competitors for half inch tape cartridges are imation and emtech magnetics gmbh formerly basf magnetics gmbh . engineering, research, and development anacomp's engineering costs, including research and development, were 4.8 million in fiscal 1997, compared to 3.7 million in fiscal 1996 and 2.2 million in fiscal 1995. the company expects its current research and development efforts to increase as it introduces new electronic and applications solutions. costs associated with these efforts will be tempered by the company's plan to acquire the rights to core technologies whenever possible. major projects in fiscal 1997 included the substantial completion of the company's dragoncom system, a version of the xfp2000 for the asian market that is capable of processing double byte ideographic languages efforts to improve the speed and expand the functionality of the company's image direct bitmapping initiative continued development of the company's pegasys initiative to automate the company's service centers and to develop advanced transmission capabilities for these centers uncompleted efforts to develop a customer service application and various engineering efforts inherited as a result of the company's acquisition of data ware including research into emerging dvd technology as it relates to document storage. the company owns various patents and licenses covering aspects of its product line and its production processes, as well as proprietary trade secret information relating to its products and services. while the company believes that the protection provided by these patents, licenses, and proprietary information is important, it also believes that equally significant is the knowledge and experience of its employees and their abilities to develop and market the company's products and services and to provide value added benefits to customers. raw materials and suppliers polyester is the principal raw material used in the manufacture of both microfilm and magnetic media products. costs for polyester remained generally stable in fiscal 1997, as a result of a relative balance between supply and demand. there can be no assurance, however, that the current trend will continue. skc america, inc. and skc limited collectively, skc is anacomp's sole supplier of duplicate microfilm, the result of a ten year supply agreement between the companies entered into in 1993 as part of skc's purchase of anacomp's sunnyvale, california duplicate microfilm facilities. skc also provides anacomp with polyester for a large percentage of its magnetic media products. in connection with the supply agreement, skc also provided anacomp with a 25 million trade credit facility, which was reduced to 15 million in fiscal 1997, secured by up to 10 million of products sold to anacomp by skc. in addition, under an amendment to the supply agreement executed in 1996, anacomp agreed to certain price increases, retroactive to 1994, and agreed to make the following deferred payments to skc related to the retroactive price increases 400,000 paid in 1997 600,000 due in 1998 800,000 due in 1999 800,000 due in 2000 and 1,000,000 due in 2001. pursuant to the skc agreement, the company is required to purchase a substantial portion of its polyester requirements for its magnetic media products. while the company could purchase certain of these magnetics polyester products from vendors other than skc, skc currently is the sole source for polyester used by the company to manufacture many magnetic media products, including open reel tape. anacomp's xfp2000 com system utilizes a proprietary, patented original film canister, and the original film used in that canister is supplied exclusively by kodak. anacomp also purchases from kodak substantially all of its requirements for original microfilm for earlier generation com recorders manufactured by anacomp and others, although the company has from time to time purchased original microfilm utilized in those older com recorders from other suppliers. industry segments foreign operations as discussed in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, anacomp operates in a single business segment providing equipment, supplies, and services for document management, including storage, processing, and retrieval. financial information concerning the company's operations in different geographical areas is included in note 21 to the consolidated financial statements. item 2. properties anacomp maintains corporate offices in carmel, indiana metropolitan indianapolis and in poway, california metropolitan san diego . micrographics manufacturing, engineering, customer service, marketing and product maintenance facilities are all located in poway, california. anacomp's magnetics manufacturing facilities are located in graham, texas and brynmawr, wales. all of anacomp's facilities have received international recognition for quality standards, earning international standards organization iso 9002 certification. the following table indicates the square footage of anacomp's facilities operating other corporate facilities facilities facilities total united states leased 646,032 90,953 47,127 784,112 owned 147,420 15,630 163,050 793,452 106,583 47,127 947,162 international leased 121,870 29,410 151,280 owned 137,853 137,853 259,723 29,410 289,133 total 1,053,175 135,993 47,127 1,236,295 other facilities consist primarily of leased space of abandoned facilities. approximately 122,908 square feet of the other facilities have been sublet to others. anacomp also leases standard office space for its sales and service centers in a variety of locations. anacomp considers its facilities adequate for its present needs and does not believe that it would experience any difficulty in replacing any of its present facilities if any of its current agreements were terminated. during october 1997 the company re negotiated a significant lease for its poway, california facility. pursuant to the amended lease, the company will expand the space it currently occupies approximately 170,000 square feet to include the entire facility 333,485 square feet . the new lease is effective january 1, 1998, and has an initial term of ten years, at the end of which time it may be renewed for successive five year terms. as discussed in note 24 to the consolidated financial statements the expanded space will primarily be utilized for the consolidation relocation of the company's indianapolis, indiana corporate offices. item 3. legal proceedings the company and its subsidiaries are potential or named defendants in several lawsuits and claims arising in the ordinary course of business. while the outcome of such claims, lawsuits or other proceedings against the company cannot be predicted with certainty, management expects that such liability, to the extent not provided for through insurance or otherwise, will not have a material adverse effect on the financial statements of the company. in the section entitled management's discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition, legal proceedings, of the prospectus included in the company's registration statement on form s 4, filed on april 16, 1997 file number 333 25281 , the company described three legal proceedings to which it was then a party 1 the dtsc matters, pursuant to which the california department of toxic substances control and the california regional water quality control board, san francisco bay region, sought civil penalties and injunctive relief against the company for alleged environmental law violations with respect to anacomp's sunnyvale, california facility, and sought to impose certain clean up obligations upon the company with respect to such facility 2 the customs claim, pursuant to which the united states customs service customs sought the repayment of what customs believed were duty drawback claims improperly refunded to anacomp and 3 the contract claim, pursuant to which smith barney, inc. smith barney sought additional fees from the company which smith barney allegedly earned for services that it provided in connection with anacomp's financial restructuring period. all three of these matters have now been settled to the satisfaction of the company, which settlements did not have a material adverse affect on its financial statements. item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders no matters were submitted during the three months ended september 30, 1997, to a vote of anacomp's security holders through the solicitation of proxies or otherwise. executive officers of the registrant the current executive officers of the company, their ages as of decemer 19, 1997 and positions are listed below name age position ralph w. koehrer 52 president, chief executive officer and director donald l. viles 51 executive vice president and chief financial officer william c. ater 57 senior vice president, chief administrative officer and secretary jeffrey r. cramer 44 senior vice president and general manager technical services cluster ray l. dicasali 49 senior vice president and chief technology officer george c. gaskin 38 senior vice president and general counsel mary jane grinstead 47 senior vice president and general manager north america west richard v. keele 48 senior vice president and general manager cds cluster stephen c. manske 52 senior vice president, cofi cluster kevin m. o'neill 43 senior vice president, business development and strategy gary m. roth 55 senior vice president and general manager magnetics cluster t. randy simmons 50 senior vice president and general manager ced cluster emery e. skarupa 45 senior vice president, manufacturing and materials donald w. thurman 51 senior vice president and general manager north america east peter williams 45 senior vice president and general manager international group jeffrey s. withem 38 senior vice president, communications thomas l. brown 41 vice president and treasurer k. gordon fife 52 vice president tax the business experience of each executive officer for the past five years is described below. each executive officer is elected for a term of one year and holds office until his successor is chosen and qualified or until his death, resignation or removal. ralph w. koehrer was elected chief executive officer and director effective may 1, 1997 on april 29, 1997 and president effective january 6, 1997 on december 10, 1996. prior to joining the company, mr. koehrer was with automatic data processing, inc. adp for eleven years, most recently as corporate vice president of adp and as president of adp's information and processing services division. donald l. viles was elected executive vice president and chief financial officer effective march 1, 1996. from october 1985 to march 1996, he served as vice president and controller. william c. ater was elected senior vice president on august 13, 1997 and chief administrative officer in february 1988. he has served as secretary since march 1985. jeffery r. cramer was elected senior vice president and general manager technical services cluster on august 13, 1997. mr. cramer joined anacomp in july 1996 with the company's acquisition of com products, inc. cpi , and served as senior vice president business development from february to august 1997. prior to joining anacomp, mr. cramer had served as president of cpi for more than the past five years. ray l. dicasali was elected senior vice president and chief technology officer on june 3, 1996. from 1993 to 1996, mr. dicasali served as senior vice president of technology and chief information officer of flexel. from 1989 to 1993, mr. dicasali was senior vice president and chief information officer of dun and bradstreet software. george c. gaskin was elected senior vice president, general counsel and assistant secretary on november 17, 1997 after serving as vice president legal and assistant secretary since june 1996. from july 1990 to june 1996, mr. gaskin served as corporate counsel and assistant secretary. mary jane grinstead was elected senior vice president and general manager north america west on november 17, 1997 after joining anacomp as senior vice president u.s. west on august 13, 1997. ms. grinstead was previously senior vice president of distribution and operations for ardis, a subsidiary of motorola corp., for more than the past five years. richard v. keele was elected senior vice president and general manager cds cluster on august 13, 1997. mr. keele joined anacomp in january 1997 with the company's acquisition of data ware, and was elected president data ware group on february 3, 1997. mr. keele had previously served as president of data ware for more than five years. stephen c. manske was elected senior vice president, cofi cluster on november 17, 1997. mr. manske had previously served as senior vice president business development from june 1996 to august 1997. prior to that, mr. manske was vice president emerging technologies from august 1993 to june 1996, and director, advanced technology development from july 1989 to august 1993. kevin m. o'neill was elected senior vice president, business development and strategy on august 13, 1997 after serving as senior vice president global marketing since june 1996. mr. o'neill had previously served as vice president global marketing from 1995 until june 1996. from 1994 to 1995, mr. o'neill served as vice president of marketing, strategic resellers group. prior to joining the company, mr. o'neill served as senior director, marketing product development for fujitsu icl systems, inc. from 1982 to 1994. gary m. roth was elected senior vice president and general manager magnetics cluster on november 17, 1997 after serving as president international group since october 1995. previously, mr. roth served as vice president americas asia division from november 1992 to september 1995. from october 1991 to october 1992, he served as manager laap canada operations. thomas r. simmons was elected senior vice president and general manager ced cluster on august 13, 1997 after serving as president u.s. group since october 1995. previously, mr. simmons served as vice president, direct sales division east from november 1994 to september 1995. prior to that, he served as vice president information systems division from november 1991 to november 1994. emery skarupa was elected senior vice president, manufacturing and materials on august 13, 1997. mr. skarupa joined the company in november 1993 as director of purchasing and was promoted to vice president of materials in may of 1996. prior to joining anacomp, mr. skarupa served as director of materials for abex aerospace, a division of abex corp., from january 1991 to november 1993. donald w. thurman was elected senior vice president and general manager north america east on november 17, 1997. mr. thurman served as senior vice president u.s. east from august 13, 1997 to november 17, 1997, and as region vice president u.s. group from october 1996 to august 13, 1997. from november 1993 to october 1995, mr. thurman was senior vice president of marketing and business development for first image. he served as general manager of the software factory from january to november 1993 and previously served as a senior vice president of the company from january 1990 to january 1993. peter williams was elected senior vice president and general manager international group on november 17, 1997 after serving as president magnetics group since october 1995. previously, he served as general manager magnetics european group from 1993 to september 1995. prior to that, he served from 1990 to 1993 as vice president, wales operations magnetics. jeffrey s. withem was elected senior vice president, communications on august 13, 1997 after serving as vice president, planning and communications and chief of staff since june 1996. mr. withem was vice president strategic planning and corporate communications from october 1995 to june 1996. from 1993 to 1995, mr. withem served as vice president marketing, for the company's magnetics group. prior to that, he was marketing communications manager for worldwide marketing for the company from 1990 to 1992. thomas l. brown was elected vice president and treasurer on may 19, 1996. from january 1995 to april 1996, mr. brown served as corporate controller of hurco companies, inc. mr. brown had previously served as assistant vice president financial reporting and analysis for the company from march 1991. k. gordon fife was elected vice president tax in october 1985. part ii item 5. market for the registrant's common stock and related stockholder matters market, holder and dividend information concerning the company's common stock appears on page a 3 of this annual report on form 10 k. item 6. selected financial data selected financial data appears on page a 2 of this annual report on form 10 k. item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations appears on pages a 4 to a 10 of this annual report on form 10 k. 