-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 KTWV5ZcO9sgNnw9Nq2rIfMw9m98ksVEZ6J7OiktjSHjvocvYxIhkINQlT+D2xHcP
 W/ee9Xt3wKliAmDbrsUOSg==

0000950129-08-002507.txt : 20080429
0000950129-08-002507.hdr.sgml : 20080429
20080429171941
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0000950129-08-002507
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K/A
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		4
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20071231
FILED AS OF DATE:		20080429
DATE AS OF CHANGE:		20080429

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			Allis Chalmers Energy Inc.
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000003982
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	OIL, GAS FIELD SERVICES, NBC [1389]
		IRS NUMBER:				390126090
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			DE
		FISCAL YEAR END:			1231

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K/A
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-02199
		FILM NUMBER:		08786828

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056
		BUSINESS PHONE:		713-369-0550

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS CORP
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19920703

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS MANUFACTURING CO
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19710614


10-K/A
1
h56222a1e10vkza.htm
AMENDMENT TO FORM 10-K



e10vkza



Table of Contents

 
 
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Washington, D. C. 20549

Form 10-K/A

Amendment No. 1

(Mark One)





 
 
 


þ
 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934



FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2007


OR



 
 
 


o
 
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934



FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD FROM            TO


Commission file number 1-2199
ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY INC.

(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)




 
 
 




Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)

 
39-0126090
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)


 
 
 


5075 WESTHEIMER, SUITE 890
HOUSTON, TEXAS
(Address of principal executive offices)

 
77056
(Zip code)




(713) 369-0550
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code
SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE ACT:




 
 
 




Title of Security:

 
Name of Exchange:


 

 
 


Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share

 
New York Stock Exchange




SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(g) OF THE ACT:
NONE
     Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule
405 of the Securities Act. Yes o No þ

     Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section
13 or 15(d). Yes o No þ

     Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed
by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o

     Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation
S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K
or any amendment to this Form 10-K. o

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer,
a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):





 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Large accelerated filer o

 
Accelerated
filer þ

 
Non-accelerated filer o

 
Smaller reporting
company o


 

 
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)




     Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of
the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ

     The aggregate market value of the common equity held by non-affiliates of the registrant,
computed using the closing price of the common stock of $22.99 per share on June 30, 2007, as
reported on the New York Stock Exchange, was approximately $462,009,706 (affiliates included for
this computation only: directors, executive officers and holders of more than 5% of the
registrant’s common stock).

     As of April 10, 2008 there were 35,130,914 shares of common stock issued and outstanding.

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
None
 
 
 



 







Explanatory Note

     The purpose of this Amendment No. 1 on Form 10-K/A (the “Amendment”) is to amend and restate
Part III, Items 10 through 14 of our previously filed Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2007, filed with the Securities Exchange Commission, or SEC, on March 7, 2008 (the
“Original Form 10-K”), to include information previously omitted in reliance on General Instruction
G to Form 10-K, which provides that registrants may incorporate by reference certain information
from a definitive proxy statement prepared in connection with the election of directors.
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. has determined to include such Part III information by amendment of the
Original Form 10-K rather than by incorporation by reference to the proxy statement. Accordingly,
Part III of the Original Form 10-K is hereby amended and restated as set forth below.

     As required by Rule 12b-15 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which we
refer to as the Exchange Act, new certifications by our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
Officer are being filed as exhibits to this Amendment No. 1 on Form 10-K/A under Item 15 of Part
IV.

     There are no other changes to the Original Form 10-K other than those outlined above. This
Amendment does not reflect events occurring after the filing of the Original Form 10-K, nor does it
modify or update disclosures therein in any way other than as required to reflect the amendment set
forth below.

     As used herein, “Allis-Chalmers”, “we”, “our” and “us” may refer to Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.
and its subsidiaries. The use of these terms is not intended to connote any particular corporate
status or relationships.

TABLE OF CONTENTS





 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
Page




PART III
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


Item 10.

 
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance

 
- 2 -


Item 11.

 
Executive Compensation

 
- 7 -


Item 12.

 
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters

 
- 25 -


Item 13.

 
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence

 
- 28 -


Item 14.

 
Principal Accounting Fees and Services

 
- 29 -


 
 
 
 
 


PART IV
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


Item 15.

 
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules

 
- 31 -


 

 
Signatures and Certifications

 
- 32 -


 Certification of the Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of the Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906





 



Table of Contents




PART III




ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

Information Regarding Directors

     Upon the closing of our acquisition of DLS Drilling, Logistics & Services Corporation, or DLS,
in August 2006, we entered into an investors rights agreement, which provides, among other things,
that the sellers of DLS have the right to designate two nominees for election to our board of
directors. Effective upon the closing of the DLS acquisition, Thomas O. Whitener, Jr. and Jens H.
Mortensen, Jr. resigned as directors of Allis-Chalmers, and the DLS sellers (pursuant to their
rights as set forth in the investors rights agreement) designated Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and
Carlos A. Bulgheroni as nominees to fill the board vacancies created by the resignations of Mr.
Whitener and Mr. Mortensen. In accordance with the provisions of the investors rights agreement,
the board appointed Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A. Bulgheroni to the board upon receipt of
the nominations. Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A. Bulgheroni are brothers.

     Upon the closing of our acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Oil & Gas Rental
Services, Inc., or OGR, in December 2006, we entered into an investor rights agreement, which
provides, among other things, that stockholders who hold a majority of the Allis-Chalmers shares
issued to OGR in this acquisition and are parties to this investor rights agreement shall have the
right to designate one nominee for election to our board of directors. Effective upon the closing
of the acquisition, OGR, as the sole holder of such shares, designated Burt A. Adams as a nominee
to our board of directors. In accordance with the provisions of the investor rights agreement, the
board appointed Burt A. Adams to the board upon receipt of the nomination.

     The following individuals serve on our board of directors for a term of one year and until
their successors are elected and take office:





 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Name
 
Age
 
Director Since




Burt A. Adams

 
 
46
 
 
December 2006


Ali H. M. Afdhal

 
 
63
 
 
September 2006


Alejandro P. Bulgheroni

 
 
64
 
 
August 2006


Carlos A. Bulgheroni

 
 
63
 
 
August 2006


Victor F. Germack

 
 
68
 
 
January 2005


James M. Hennessy

 
 
59
 
 
April 2007


Munawar H. Hidayatallah

 
 
63
 
 
May 2001


John E. McConnaughy, Jr.

 
 
78
 
 
May 2004


Robert E. Nederlander

 
 
74
 
 
May 1989


Zane Tankel

 
 
68
 
 
February 2007


Leonard Toboroff

 
 
75
 
 
May 1989




     Burt A. Adams was appointed as Vice Chairman of our board of directors on December 18, 2006
and became our President and Chief Operating Officer on December 19, 2006, and served in such
capacity until his resignation, effective February 28, 2008. Mr. Adams has served as President and
Chief Executive Officer of Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc. since 1996. In April 2006, Mr. Adams was
appointed a director of ATP Oil & Gas Corporation. He also serves as Chairman of Offshore Energy
Center, Ocean Star Museum, located in Galveston, Texas and is a member of the National Ocean
Industries Association (NOIA). Mr. Adams worked for Hydril Company in Houston, Texas from 1988 to
1996.

     Ali H. M. Afdhal was appointed to our board of directors on September 12, 2006. Since 2001,
Mr. Afdhal has operated and managed his family’s international and agricultural interests. Mr.
Afdhal is a graduate of The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.

     Alejandro P. Bulgheroni was appointed to our board of directors on August 14, 2006. Mr.
Bulgheroni has served as the Chairman of the Management Committee of Pan American Energy LLC, an
oil and gas company, since November 1997. He also served as the Chairman of Bridas SAPIC from 1988
until 1997. He has served as Vice-Chairman and Executive Vice-President of Bridas Corporation since
1993. He also serves as Chairman and President of Associated

-2-



Table of Contents

Petroleum Investors Ltd., an international oil and gas holding company, as Chairman and
President of Global Oilfield Holdings Ltd. and as Chairman of Beusa Energy, Inc.. Mr. Bulgheroni is
a member of the Petroleum and Gas Argentine Institute and of the Society of Petroleum Engineers
(USA), Vice-President of the Argentine Chamber of Hydrocarbons Producers (CEPH), Vice-President of
the Argentine-Uruguayan Chamber of Commerce, Counselor of the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange,
Counselor of the Argentine Business Council for Sustainable Development (CEADS) and President of
the Educando Foundation (Argentina). Mr. Bulgheroni is a graduate of the University of Buenos Aires
with a degree in Industrial Engineering.

     Carlos A. Bulgheroni was appointed to our board of directors on August 14, 2006. Mr.
Bulgheroni has served as the Chairman and President of Bridas Corporation, an international oil and
gas holding company, since 1993. He has been a member of the Management Committee of Pan American
Energy LLC since November 1997. He is also a member of the International Council of the Center for
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS-Washington), the International Committee of The Kennedy
Center for the Performing Arts and the Executive Board of the International Chamber of Commerce
(ICC-Paris). Mr. Bulgheroni is a graduate of the University of Buenos Aires Law School.

     Victor F. Germack was appointed to our board of directors in January 2005. Mr. Germack has
served since 1980 as President of Heritage Capital Corp., a company engaged in investment banking
services. In addition, Mr. Germack formed, and since 2002 has been President of, RateFinancials
Inc., a company that rates and ranks the financial reporting of U.S. public companies.

     James M. Hennessy was appointed to our board of directors in April 2007. Mr. Hennessy served
as President and Chief Executive Officer of ING Funds, a United States mutual fund business of ING
Group, from 2001 through 2006. While with ING Funds, Mr. Hennessy oversaw approximately 216 mutual
funds with an aggregate of approximately $92 billion in assets under management. From 2003 through
2007, Mr. Hennessy also served on the board of governors of the Investment Company Institute, which
is the national trade association for the mutual fund industry, representing most of the industry’s
assets. Mr. Hennessy is currently on the board of directors of Natural Lighting Company and Munden
Capital Holdings, LLC and is a member of the advisory board of the law, science and technology LLM
program of Arizona State University Law School. In addition, Mr. Hennessy has a law degree from
New York University.

     Munawar H. Hidayatallah has served as our Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
since May 2001, and was President from May 2001 through February 2003. Mr. Hidayatallah was Chief
Executive Officer of OilQuip Rentals, Inc., from its formation in February 2000 until it merged
with us in May 2001. From December 1994 until August 1999, Mr. Hidayatallah was the Chief Financial
Officer and a director of IRI International, Inc., which was acquired by National Oilwell, Inc. in
early 2000. IRI International, Inc. manufactured, sold and rented oilfield equipment to the
oilfield and natural gas exploration and production sectors. From August 1999 until February 2001,
Mr. Hidayatallah worked as a consultant to IRI International, Inc. and Riddell Sports Inc.

     John E. McConnaughy, Jr. was appointed to our board of directors in May 2004. Mr. McConnaughy
has served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of JEMC Corporation, a personal holding company,
since he founded it in 1985. His career includes positions of management with Westinghouse Electric
and the Singer Company, as well as service as a director of numerous public and private companies.
In addition, he previously served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Peabody International
Corp. and Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of GEO International Corp. He retired from Peabody
in February 1986 and GEO in October 1992. Mr. McConnaughy currently serves on the boards of Wave
Systems Corp., Levcor International, Inc., and Arrow Resources Development Inc.

     Robert E. Nederlander has served as our director since May 1989. Mr. Nederlander served as our
Chairman of the board of directors from May 1989 to 1993, and as our Vice Chairman of the board of
directors from 1993 to 1996. Mr. Nederlander was a Director of Cendant Corp. from December 1997
and Chairman of the Corporate Governance Committee of Cendant Corp. from 2002 until he resigned in
2006 when he became a director of Realogy Corporation, a public company which was a spinoff from
Cendant Corp. Mr. Nederlander resigned as a director of Realogy Corporation on April 10, 2007,
when the company was sold. Mr. Nederlander was a director of HFS, Inc. from July 1995 to December
1997. Since November 1981, Mr. Nederlander has been President and/or Director of the Nederlander
Organization, Inc., owner and operator of legitimate theaters in New York City. Since December
1998, Mr. Nederlander has been a managing partner of the Nederlander Company, LLC, operator of
legitimate theaters outside New York City. Mr. Nederlander was Chairman of the board of directors
of Varsity Brands, Inc. (formerly Riddell Sports Inc.) from April 1988 to September 2003 and was
the Chief Executive Officer of such corporation from 1988 through April 1, 1993. Mr.

-3-



Table of Contents

Nederlander has been a limited partner and a director of the New York Yankees since 1973. Mr.
Nederlander has been President of Nederlander Television and Film Productions, Inc. since October
1985. In addition, from January 1988 to January 2002, Mr. Nederlander was Chairman of the Board
and Chief Executive Officer of Mego Financial Corp., doing business as Leisure Industries
Corporation of America, which filed a voluntary petition under Chapter 11 of the U.S. federal
bankruptcy code in July 2003. The voluntary petition was dismissed by the bankruptcy court in
2006.

     Zane Tankel has served as our director since February 2007. Mr. Tankel is currently Chief
Executive Officer of Apple-Metro, Inc., the New York Metropolitan Area franchisee for Applebee’s
Neighborhood Grill & Bar, and has been the Chairman of the Board of Apple-Metro, Inc. and Chevys
Fresh Mex Restaurants since 1994. Mr. Tankel also serves as a member of the board of directors of
Mortons Restaurant Group, Inc. and Caribbean Restaurant LLC. Mr. Tankel has also served as
Chairman of the Board of the Metro Chapter of the Young Presidents Organization and was a founder
of the advisory board for the Boys and Girls Choir of Harlem. Mr. Tankel is a graduate of the
University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School of Business.

     Leonard Toboroff has served as our director and Vice Chairman of the board of directors since
May 1989 and served as our Executive Vice President from May 1989 until February 2002. Mr. Toboroff
served as a director and Vice President of Varsity Brands, Inc. (formerly Riddell Sports Inc.) from
April 1988 through October 2003, and he is also a director of Engex Corp and Novoste Corporation.
Mr. Toboroff is currently a managing (executive) director of Corinthian Capital, a private equity
firm and a director of Special Purpose Acquisition Corporation. Mr. Toboroff has been a practicing
attorney continuously since 1961.

Information Regarding Executive Officers

     The following table sets forth the names, ages and positions of each of our current executive
officers, all of whom serve at the request of our board of directors and are subject to annual
appointment by the board of directors:





 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Name
 
Age
 
Position




 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Munawar H. Hidayatallah

 
 
63
 
 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Victor M. Perez

 
 
55
 
 
Chief Financial Officer


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Theodore F. Pound III

 
 
53
 
 
General Counsel and Secretary


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bruce Sauers

 
 
44
 
 
Vice President and Corporate Controller


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Terrence P. Keane

 
 
56
 
 
Senior Vice President—Oilfield Services


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Mark C. Patterson

 
 
49
 
 
Senior Vice President—Rental Services; President
of Allis-Chalmers Rental Services LLC


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


David K. Bryan

 
 
51
 
 
President and Chief Executive Officer of Strata
Directional Technology LLC


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Steven Collins

 
 
56
 
 
President of Allis-Chalmers Production Services LLC


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Gary Edwards

 
 
56
 
 
President of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services LLC


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


John A. Meyers

 
 
47
 
 
President of AirComp LLC




     Munawar H. Hidayatallah has served as our Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
since May 2001, and was President from May 2001 through February 2003. Mr. Hidayatallah was Chief
Executive Officer of OilQuip Rentals, Inc. from its formation in February 2000 until it merged with
us in May 2001. From December 1994 until August 1999, Mr. Hidayatallah was the Chief Financial
Officer and a director of IRI International, Inc., which was acquired by National Oilwell, Inc. in
early 2000. IRI International, Inc. manufactured, sold and rented oilfield equipment to the
oilfield and natural gas exploration and production sectors. From August 1999 until February 2001,
Mr. Hidayatallah worked as a consultant to IRI International, Inc. and Riddell Sports Inc.

-4-



Table of Contents

     Victor M. Perez became our Chief Financial Officer in August 2004. From July 2003 to July
2004, Mr. Perez was a private consultant engaged in corporate and international finance advisory.
From February 1995 to June 2003, Mr. Perez was Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Trico
Marine Services, Inc., a marine transportation company serving the offshore energy industry. Trico
Marine Services, Inc. filed a petition under the federal bankruptcy laws in December 2004. Mr.
Perez was Vice President of Corporate Finance with Offshore Pipelines, Inc., an oilfield marine
construction company, from October 1990 to January 1995, when that company merged with a subsidiary
of McDermott International. Mr. Perez also has 15 years of experience in international energy
banking.

     Theodore F. Pound III became our General Counsel in October 2004 and was elected Secretary in
January 2005. For ten years prior to joining us, he practiced law with the law firm of Wilson,
Cribbs & Goren, P.C., Houston, Texas. Mr. Pound has practiced law for more than 27 years. Mr. Pound
has represented us and managed each of our acquisitions beginning in 2001.

     Bruce Sauers has served as our Vice President and Corporate Controller since July 2005. From
January 2005 until July 2005, Mr. Sauers was Controller of Blast Energy Inc., an oilfield services
company. From June 2004 until January 2005, Mr. Sauers worked as a financial and accounting
consultant. From July 2003 until June 2004, Mr. Sauers served as controller for HMT, Inc., an above
ground storage tank company. From February 2003 until July 2003, Mr. Sauers served as assistant
controller at Todco, an offshore drilling contractor. Mr. Sauers has served in a financial
management role for approximately 20 years.

     Terrence P. Keane became Senior Vice President—Oilfield Services in January 2008 and prior to
that served as President and Chief Executive Officer of AirComp since its formation on July 1,
2003. In addition, Mr. Keane has served as a consultant to M-I in the area of compressed air
drilling from July 2002 until June 2003. From March 1999 until June 2002, Mr. Keane served as Vice
President and General Manager — Exploration, Production and Processing Services for Gas Technology
Institute where Mr. Keane was responsible for all sales, marketing, operations and research and
development in the exploration, production and processing business unit. For 15 years prior to
joining the Gas Technology Institute, Mr. Keane held various positions with Smith International,
Inc., in Houston, Texas, most recently in the position of Vice President Worldwide Operations and
Sales for Smith Tool.

     Mark C. Patterson is Senior Vice President—Rental Services and President of Allis-Chalmers
Rental Services LLC. Prior to such time Mr. Patterson served as Executive Vice President of Sales
and Business Development for Allis-Chalmers Rental Services LLC, organizing, managing and
coordinating the sales effort for the company. Mr. Patterson also previously worked with Oil & Gas
Rental Services, Inc. since August 1989 and has over 18 years experience in the rental service
business and over 27 years experience in the oil and gas service sector of the oil and gas
industry. While with Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc., Mr. Patterson served as Vice President of
Sales in Houston, managing the Houston sales and marketing effort until Dec. 18, 2006.

     David K. Bryan has served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Strata Directional
Technology LLC, or Strata, since February 2005. Mr. Bryan served as Vice President of Strata from
June 2002 until February 2005. From February 2002 to June 2002, he served as General Manager, and
from May 1999 through February 2002, he served as Operations Manager of Strata. Mr. Bryan has been
involved in the directional drilling sector since 1979.

     Steven Collins has served as President of Allis-Chalmers Production Services LLC, or
Production Services, since December 2005. Mr. Collins was our corporate Vice President of Sales and
Marketing from June 2005 to December 2005. From 2002 to 2005, Mr. Collins served as Sales Manager
of Well Testing and Corporate Strategic Accounts Manager for TETRA Technologies. From 1997 to 2002,
Mr. Collins was in sales for Production Well Testers. Mr. Collins has over 25 years’ experience in
various sales and management positions in the oilfield services industry.

     Gary Edwards has served as President of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services LLC, or Tubular, since
December 2005 after serving as Executive Vice President of Tubular since September 2005. From April
1997 to September 2005, Mr. Edwards served as Operations Manager for International
Hammer/Spindletop Tubular Services, a division of Patterson Services, Inc. Mr. Edwards has been in
the casing and tubing industry for the past 29 years.

     John A. Meyers was appointed President of AirComp LLC in January 2008. Prior to this
appointment, Mr. Meyers served as Vice President of Percussion Drilling Systems for AirComp LLC
since November 2006. Mr. Meyers has also served in several managerial roles within the company
that have included Engineering, Manufacturing and Product

-5-



Table of Contents

Management responsibilities. Mr. Meyers has over 25 years experience in the oilfield service
industry including 20 years with Smith International and Halliburton where he had Field Engineering
responsibilities for Roller Cone and PDC Bits, Directional Drilling, Down-hole Motors, MWD and Air
Percussion tools. Mr. Meyers holds several US patents pertaining to air hammers and bits and has
written numerous industry papers on percussion drilling. Mr. Meyers is a graduate of Louisiana
State University with a degree in Mechanical Engineering.

Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance

     Under Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, directors, certain officers, and beneficial owners of
10% or more of any class of our stock are required from time to time to file with the SEC and the
New York Stock Exchange reports of ownership and changes of ownership. We refer to these
directors, officers and beneficial owners as reporting persons. Reporting persons are required to
furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) reports they file. Based solely on our review of forms
and written representations received from reporting persons with respect to the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2007, we believe that all filing requirements applicable to our officers, directors
and greater than 10% stockholders have been met, except for a late Form 4 filing by Gary Edwards in
connection with the grant of stock options in December 2005, a late Form 4 filing by Bruce Sauers
in connection with the grant of restricted stock in February 2007 and in connection with the grant
of restricted stock in December 2007, a late Form 4 filing by Jeffrey R. Freedman in connection
with the transfer of shares in August 2005 and the grant of stock options and restricted stock in
April 2007, a late Form 4 filing by James Davey in connection with the sale of stock in June 2007,
a late Form 4 filing by Munawar Hidayatallah in connection with the grant of restricted stock in
August 2007, a late Form 4 filing by Robert E. Nederlander in connection with the sale of shares in
August 2007, a late Form 4 filing by each of James M. Hennessy and Zane Tankel in connection with
the grant of bonus shares in December 2007, a late Form 4 filing by each of Terrence P. Keane and
David K. Bryan in connection with the grant of restricted stock in June 2007, a late Form 4 filing
by John Meyers in connection with the grant of restricted stock in December 2007, a late Form 3
filing by Gary Edwards when he became President of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services, Inc. and a late
Form 3 filing by John Meyers when he became President of AirComp LLC.

Code of Business Conduct and Ethics

     We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics applicable to all our employees and each
of our subsidiaries, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer,
principal accounting officer and controller, and persons performing similar functions. The purpose
of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics is to:




 
•
 
deter wrongdoing;


 

 
•
 
promote honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling of actual
or apparent conflicts of interest between personal and professional relationships;


 

 
•
 
promote full, fair, accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure in reports
and documents that we file with the SEC or otherwise communicate to the public;


 

 
•
 
promote compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations;


 

 
•
 
promote prompt internal reporting of violations of the code to an appropriate
person; and


 

 
•
 
promote accountability for adherence to the code.



     We will provide a copy of our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics without charge to any person
upon request by contacting our Corporate Secretary at our executive offices located at 5075
Westheimer, Suite 890 ,Houston, Texas 77056 or (713) 369-0550. The Code of Business Conduct and
Ethics is also available on our website at www.alchenergy.com under the “Investor
Relations—Governance” tab.

Audit Committee

     Our Audit Committee currently consists of three directors, Mr. McConnaughy and Mr. Germack,
who serve as Co-Chairmen, and Mr. Nederlander. All of our Audit Committee members are
“independent” under the applicable New York

-6-



Table of Contents

Stock Exchange and Securities and Exchange Commission rules regarding audit committee
membership. Our board of directors has determined that Mr. Germack qualifies as an “audit committee
financial expert” under applicable SEC rules and regulations governing the composition of the Audit
Committee.

     The Audit Committee assists our board of directors in fulfilling its oversight responsibility
by overseeing and evaluating:




 
•
 
the conduct of our accounting and financial reporting process and the integrity
of our financial statements;


 

 
•
 
the functioning of our systems of internal accounting and financial controls; and


 

 
•
 
the engagement, compensation, performance, qualifications and independence of our
independent auditors.



     The independent auditors have unrestricted access and report directly to the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee meets privately with, and has unrestricted access to, the independent auditors
and all of our personnel.

     Our board of directors has adopted a written Audit Committee charter. A copy of the Audit
Committee charter is available on our website (www.alchenergy.com).




ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION

Compensation Discussion and Analysis

     The following is a discussion of the principles and policies underlying our executive
compensation program as well as the manner and context in which we award compensation for each of
the named executives identified in the Summary Compensation Table below.

Executive Compensation Philosophy and Objectives

     It is critical to our long-term success and growth that our business is managed by highly
capable leaders with the experience and dedication to oversee a growing and changing organization.
To achieve this objective, our compensation philosophy is to recruit, retain and motivate talented
and effective employees. We focus on traditional compensation principles that are geared to both
our short-term and long-term performance. We adhere to the following compensation principles which
influence the design and administration of our executive compensation program:




 
•
 
Compensation decisions should reflect our strategy — We have experienced rapid growth
in recent years. As we have grown, we have made compensation decisions that reflect our
size and growth.


 

 
•
 
Total compensation should reflect performance— Our compensation program provides
incentives that reward executives for achieving short-term as well as long-term financial
and operational goals. Our total compensation program is managed so that a significant
amount of executive compensation is considered at risk, and conditioned on performance.


 

 
•
 
Compensation levels must be competitive— Demand for qualified executive talent in our
industry is high, while the supply for this talent is limited. The level of base salaries,
short-term incentive opportunities, and long-term incentive opportunities established for
our named executive officers are intended to provide a total target compensation
opportunity in the range of the market median for executives in comparable positions and
markets in which we compete for talent.


 

 
•
 
Executive interests should be aligned with those of our stockholders— The value of our
executive compensation programs should generally vary as our stockholders experience
increase or decrease in value. Through the use of performance related annual incentives,
stock option grants, and restricted stock grants, we attempt to align the long-term
interests of our executives with those of our stockholders by linking a portion of
executive compensation to our long-term financial performance.



-7-



Table of Contents







 
•
 
Compensation programs should motivate executives to stay with us over the long-term— In
addition to providing compensation that is competitive with the market, we attempt to
provide incentive for our executives to stay with the company. We use time vested option
and restricted stock awards in our compensation program, providing retention incentives for
our executives to stay with us. In the last year, we entered into an employment agreement
with each of our named executive officers. Each of these high performing executives have
been retained for three year terms. The Compensation Committee believes that retaining
each of these individuals will play a critical role in our future success.



Role of Compensation Committee

     Executive officer compensation is administered by the Compensation Committee of our board of
directors, which is composed of two non-employee directors who satisfy the independence
requirements of the New York Stock Exchange. Our board of directors appoints the members of the
Compensation Committee, and delegates to the Compensation Committee the responsibility for, among
other matters:




 
•
 
evaluating and approving our overall compensation programs;


 

 
•
 
annually reviewing the performance of and setting the compensation (i.e., salary,
incentive awards, and all other elements) for our chief executive officer;


 

 
•
 
annually reviewing the performance of and recommending the compensation for the other
executive officers; and


 

 
•
 
reviewing and approving annual goals and mechanics along with administering our annual
incentive and equity compensation plans and programs.



Compensation Governance

     Each year the compensation paid to our chief executive officer is reviewed and approved by the
Compensation Committee. The compensation awarded to our other named executive officers is proposed
by the CEO, reviewed by the Compensation Committee and then recommended to the Board of Directors
for final approval.

     Our Board of Directors generally approves the compensation plans which govern our various
direct compensation programs and elements. The table below outlines the governance of those
programs.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Reviewed and
 
 


 
 
Compensation Element
 
Plan/Governance
 
Recommended By:
 
Approved By:




 

 
Base Salary

 
Employment Agreement
 
 
 
 


CEO

 
Annual Bonus

 
Employment Agreement

 
Compensation

 
Compensation


 

 
Long-Term Incentives

 
2006 Incentive Plan

 
Committee

 
Committee


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 
Base Salary

 
Employment Agreements
 
 
 
 


NEOs

 
Annual Bonus

 
Employment Agreements

 
CEO & Compensation
 
 


 

 
Long-Term Incentives

 
2006 Incentive Plan

 
Committee

 
Board of Directors




Role of Compensation Consultants

     Pursuant to its charter, the Compensation Committee is authorized to retain any compensation
consultants or other advisors as it deems appropriate to assist in compensation matters. Since
2007, the Compensation Committee has periodically engaged Cogent Compensation Partners, Inc., or
Cogent, to serve as an independent compensation consultant to the Compensation Committee on
executive compensation matters. Cogent performs work at the direction and under the supervision of
the Compensation Committee and provides advice, research and analytical services on a variety of
compensation related subjects.

-8-



Table of Contents

Role of Our Executive Officers in Establishing Compensation

     Mr. Hidayatallah, our chief executive officer, is actively involved in the compensation
process and provides recommendations to the Compensation Committee in its evaluation and
administration of compensation programs for our executive officers, including the recommendation of
individual compensation levels for executive officers, other than himself. In developing
compensation recommendations, Mr. Hidayatallah has relied on his many years of experience serving
as an executive officer in the oilfield service industry as well as publicly available information
for comparable compensation guidance. No other executive officer assumes an active role in the
evaluation, design or administration of our executive officer compensation programs. Mr.
Hidayatallah participates in Compensation Committee meetings relating to the compensation of our other executive
officers. Mr. Hidayatallah does not attend Compensation Committee meetings that pertain to
him.

Benchmarking

     We compare our compensation practices with other comparable companies when making
determinations about compensation. Our current peer group of companies was established in 2006.
The companies chosen as our peers were selected as representative of the sector in which we operate
and of our relative size in terms of market capitalization and revenue. With the assistance of
Cogent, our compensation consultant, we reviewed the compensation of our executive officers
relative to that paid to executives in our peer group. We use this type of benchmarking as a
source of information which complements our own analysis, and not as an independent source for
making compensation related decisions. Competitive compensation information provided to us by
Cogent represents only part of our decision making process and serves to help us better understand
the competitive environment for executive pay.

     Our peer group consists of the following companies:




 
•
 
Core Laboratories


 

 
•
 
Gulfmark Offshore Inc.


 

 
•
 
NATCO Group Inc.


 

 
•
 
Newpark Resources


 

 
•
 
Oil States Intl. Inc.


 

 
•
 
RPC Inc.


 

 
•
 
Superior Energy Services Inc.


 

 
•
 
Superior Well Services Inc.


 

 
•
 
Tesco Corp.


 

 
•
 
Tetra Technologies Inc.


 

 
•
 
W-H Energy Services Inc.



     Cogent used compensation information from the peer companies and combined it with published
compensation surveys specific to the energy industry to analyze the base salaries and total
compensation of each of our named executive officers. The primary energy industry survey used was
the 2007 Mercer Energy Compensation Survey in which 217 energy industry companies participated.
Our analysis for 2007 compensation showed our named executive officers positioned near the market
median of these companies for base salaries and total cash compensation.

Components of Executive Compensation

     Our executive compensation program consists of the following components: base salary, annual bonus,
long-term incentives, perquisites and benefits.

     Base Salary

     Competitive base salaries are designed to attract and retain employees by providing them with
a stable source of income. In addition, base salaries for our executive officers are designed to
compensate the executive for the

-9-



Table of Contents

experience, education, personal qualities and other qualifications of that individual that are
essential for the specific role of such executive, while remaining competitive with the market.
This market consists of both the oilfield services industry and other service-based industries. We
have historically set pay at levels that reflect the qualifications of the individuals and their
competing opportunities in the market. Our annual incentive compensation is expressed as a
percentage of base salary.

     Base salaries are generally reviewed on an annual basis. In addition to benchmarking, as
noted above, our chief executive officer considers various factors when recommending base salaries,
including:




 
•
 
the executive’s individual performance;


 

 
•
 
the performance of the executive’s business unit within Allis-Chalmers;


 

 
•
 
company-wide performance;


 

 
•
 
the executive’s experience and expertise;


 

 
•
 
the executive’s position and job responsibilities;


 

 
•
 
the executive’s years of service with us; and


 

 
•
 
the competitive pay levels for similar positions.



     No specific weight is assigned to any of these factors and our chief executive officer
exercises subjective judgment when making salary recommendations with respect to our executive
officers.

     Annual Incentive Compensation

     A significant portion of each executive’s total compensation is variable and dependent upon
the achievement of one or more goals. Annual incentive compensation primarily consists of cash
bonuses. When determining these bonuses, we rely on performance criteria such as the achievement
of certain earnings per share or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or
EBITDA, the successful completion of specific job responsibilities or the achievement of other
items integral to our success. For 2007, the primary performance criteria used for our corporate
executives was meeting specified earnings guidance and successfully completing individual goals
pertaining to specified job responsibilities. For our chief financial officer, these goals included
managing our financial reporting function, maintaining Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, obtaining
financing for acquisitions and receiving an unqualified audit opinion. For our general counsel,
these goals included performance related to acquisitions, the timely filing of regulatory reports
and successfully managing our legal issues. These performance criteria are generally set forth in
each executive’s employment agreement. For our division heads, their performance goals are
generally tied to the achievement of established EBITDA goals for each such division. For each
executive, our chief executive officer evaluates performance in light of the specified performance
criteria for each executive and recommends to the Compensation Committee the amount of the annual incentive
payment to be awarded. An annual cash bonus may be more than, less than or equal to the target
cash bonus amount set for each executive.

     Long-Term Incentive Compensation

     We award long-term incentive compensation to focus our executives on our long-term growth and
stockholder return, as well as to encourage our executives to remain with us for the long-term.
Prior to 2006, we primarily granted long-term incentives in the form of stock options pursuant to
our Amended and Restated 2003 Stock Option Plan. We selected this form because of the favorable
accounting and tax treatment and the expectation of key employees in our industry that they would
receive stock options. In 2006, we reassessed our form of award and the Committee adopted the 2006
Incentive Plan, or the 2006 Plan, in order to provide us with a mix of long-term incentive vehicles
to complement our stock option awards, namely restricted stock. We do not have pre-established
target award amounts for long-term incentive grants. Instead, our chief executive officer
recommends the number of awards to grant to each executive.

     Stock Options. Stock options are an important aspect of our long-term compensation
program. Stock options are granted with an exercise price equal to the fair market value of the
option on the date of grant. In 2007, we granted stock options to our chief executive officer and
chief financial officer as a means of motivating them to increase stockholder value by aligning
their interests with those of our stockholders.

-10-



Table of Contents

     Restricted Stock. Our use of restricted stock is intended to maintain consistency in
management by encouraging our executives to stay with us for the long-term. Restricted stock
awards provide some value to an employee during periods of stock market volatility, whereas stock
options may have limited perceived value and may do little to retain and motivate employees when
the current value of our stock is less than the option price. Further, restricted stock is a
meaningful mechanism to align the interests of executives with those of our stockholders, without
fostering an environment of undue risks.

     In determining long-term incentive awards for the executives, the Compensation Committee
relies on recommendations from our chief executive officer. Our chief executive officer considers
several factors, including our performance, the individual performance of the executives, the share
usage and associated accounting expense when determining restricted stock awards. In 2007, we
granted restricted stock to our all of our named executive officers in connection with their
renewed employment agreements.

     Perquisites

     Our named executive officers received certain perquisites in 2007 which consisted of health
benefits paid for by us, payment of life insurance premiums and a monthly car allowance. We provide
these benefits to our named executive officers as part of a competitive compensation package. In
addition, we provide Mr. Hidayatallah with access to a company car and driver because we believe
that this allows him to devote optimal time to our business and increases his efficiency.

     In addition to the benefits named above, we reimburse Mr. Hidayatallah for maintaining an
apartment in Houston, Texas in close proximity to our corporate office because Mr. Hidayatallah
resides in California. We also reimburse Mr. Hidayatallah for expenses for traveling between Texas
and California. Mr. Hidayatallah’s reimbursements for his travel expenses and his apartment in
Houston are provided for in his employment agreement.

     We did not provide tax gross-ups related to these perquisites in 2007.

     Employee Benefits

     We offer our named executive officers standard employee benefits to provide for them in time
of disability and to allow us to remain competitive in the market in order to attract and retain
key employees. Our primary benefits, which are available to all employees, include participation
in our employee health, dental and vision plans, disability and life insurance plans and our 401(k)
savings plan. We currently match 50% of the employees’ pre-tax contributions up to 6% of the
employee’s salary (including bonus), subject to contribution limits. We also pay the cost of health
insurance premiums for each of our named executive officers.

Compensation of the Named Executive Officers

Chairman & Chief Executive Officer

     We entered into a new employment agreement with Mr. Hidayatallah effective April 2007. The
terms of the agreement were proposed by Mr. Hidayatallah and the Compensation Committee retained
the services of Cogent to assist in negotiating the terms of the agreement. Pursuant to his
agreement, Mr. Hidayatallah’s salary was increased from $400,000 to $500,000, which represented a
25% increase in his annual salary. The salary was set just below the market median as reported by
Cogent. The Compensation Committee also felt this increase was reasonable given the
competitiveness of the salary in the market, and the significant strides we have made in terms of
growth under the direction and leadership of Mr. Hidayatallah. The agreement also provides Mr.
Hidayatallah the opportunity to earn an annual incentive bonus equal to 100% of his base salary,
which makes him eligible to receive up to $1 million in annual total cash compensation. The
resulting total cash compensation would position Mr. Hidayatallah’s pay near the market median if
the annual incentive bonus was achieved. Although Mr. Hidayatallah did not receive his target
annual incentive bonus for 2007, he did receive a $100,000 bonus for our performance during the
first quarter of 2007.

     In connection with his employment agreement, Mr. Hidayatallah was awarded 685,000 shares of
performance-based restricted stock and 200,000 stock options. The annualized present value of the
award is approximately $4.66

-11-



Table of Contents

million, which is equivalent to 5.8 times the annualized long-term incentive value awarded at
the 75th percentile of our peer group. The Compensation Committee granted these awards in order to
recognize the dedication and leadership of Mr. Hidayatallah as well as to further retain and
motivate Mr. Hidayatallah to continue to focus on the growth of Allis-Chalmers. While this award’s
value falls within the top quartile of the market, which is generally outside our normal
compensation strategy, the Compensation Committee considered the significant growth of
Allis-Chalmers since inception under the direction of
Mr. Hidayatallah. Particularly, the
Compensation Committee noted that in 2003 we had revenues of $33 million with net income of $2.3
million and in 2007 our revenues increased to $571 million with net income of $50.4 million. In
addition, our market capitalization increased from approximately $12 million in 2003 to
approximately $512 million in 2007. The Compensation Committee also felt the restricted stock
award was appropriate because it is performance-based, making it both tax deductible and
stockholder friendly since the performance measure of the restricted stock award is based upon an
increase each year in total stockholder return. It should be noted that the first tranche of the
restricted stock award did not vest on the first vesting date, which was April 1, 2008, because the
performance measure based on total stockholder return was not achieved.

Chief Financial Officer

     We entered into a new employment agreement with Mr. Perez effective April 2007. Pursuant to
his new agreement, Mr. Perez’ salary was increased from $260,000 to $286,000, which represented
approximately a 10% increase in his annual salary. In considering the competitiveness of the
increase, the Compensation Committee was provided with market data which showed the increase would
position his base salary just above the market median. The agreement also provides Mr. Perez the
opportunity to earn an annual incentive bonus equal to 50% of his base salary. The total cash
compensation that Mr. Perez is eligible to receive is between the market 25th percentile and the
median, according to information provided to the Compensation Committee by Cogent. Although Mr.
Perez met his individual performance goals, we did not meet our earnings guidance for the year and,
therefore, Mr. Perez did not receive an annual incentive bonus for 2007.

     In connection with his employment agreement, Mr. Perez was awarded 15,000 stock options and
25,000 shares of performance-based restricted stock. The annual present value of the equity on the
date of grant positioned Mr. Perez’ total direct compensation around the market 75th percentile,
according to a report provided to us by Cogent. In making these grants, the Compensation Committee
considered such factors as his role in obtaining financing for our acquisitions, his oversight in
the successful implementation of our financial controls systems, his receipt of three consecutive
“clean” audit opinions and his overall leadership in the accounting and finance function.

General Counsel & Secretary

     We entered into a new employment agreement with Mr. Pound in December 2007. Pursuant to his
new agreement, Mr. Pound’s salary was increased from $240,000 to $250,000, which represented
approximately a 4% increase and positioned his base salary at the market median. The agreement also
provides Mr. Pound the opportunity to earn an annual incentive bonus equal to 50% of his base
salary. The total cash compensation that Mr. Pound is eligible to receive is between the market
25th percentile and the median, based on information provided by Cogent. Although Mr. Pound met
his individual performance goals, we did not meet our earnings guidance for the year and,
therefore, Mr. Pound did not receive a bonus for 2007.

     In connection with his employment agreement, Mr. Pound was awarded 15,000 shares of restricted
stock. This equity grant was awarded to Mr. Pound for the high level of responsibility he assumed
in successfully overseeing our acquisitions and other important compliance responsibilities. In
addition, these equity awards were made to retain and motivate Mr. Pound to focus on the long-term
growth of Allis-Chalmers.

President and CEO of Strata Directional Technology LLC

     We entered into a new employment agreement with Mr. Bryan in July 2007. Mr. Bryan’s salary
was maintained at $250,000 as his base salary was already positioned between the market median and
the 75th percentile. The agreement also provides Mr. Bryan the opportunity to earn an annual
incentive bonus equal to 100% of his base salary. The total cash compensation that Mr. Bryan is
eligible to receive is above the market’s 75th percentile, according to information

-12-



Table of Contents

provided to the Compensation Committee by Cogent. For 2007, Mr. Bryan received an annual
incentive bonus of $231,250. Mr. Bryan’s sole performance measure in determining his annual
incentive bonus is budgeted EBITDA and Mr. Bryan exceeded his EBITDA performance goals.

     In connection with his employment agreement, Mr. Bryan was awarded 112,500 shares of
restricted stock for 2007. This equity grant was awarded to Mr. Bryan for being the highest
performing named executive officer in 2007. Despite losing 19 directional drillers in 2007, his
division maintained EBITDA and revenue targets and had the highest return on capital employed. In
addition, the Compensation Committee considered the high performance of Strata Directional
Technology LLC, or Strata, over the past five years. In 2003 Strata had revenues of $16.0 million
and EBITDA of $1.4 million. Under the leadership of Mr. Bryan, in 2007 Strata had increased its
revenues to $96 million with EBITDA of $21.9 million. Strata also has the highest return on
capital employed among all of our business segments. The size of Mr. Bryan’s equity award in
comparison to those made to other named executive officers for 2007, other than the chief executive
officer, is a reflection of Mr. Bryan’s exceptional performance during 2007.

Senior Vice President—Oilfield Services

     We
entered into a new employment agreement with Mr. Keane in
July 2007 and increased his salary from $175,000 to $225,000,
which represented a 29% increase in his annual base salary. Mr. Keane’s 2007
compensation is based upon his service as President of AirComp LLC.
In January 2008, Mr. Keane was promoted to Senior Vice
President – Oilfield Services and his basic salary was increased to
$250,000. The increase positioned Mr. Keane’s salary between the market median and the 75th
percentile. In April 2008, Mr. Keane’s employment agreement was amended to reflect his new position
and his salary was increased to $275,000.

     The agreement also provides Mr. Keane the opportunity to earn an annual incentive bonus equal
to 100% of his base salary. The total cash compensation that Mr. Keane is eligible to receive is
above the market’s 75th percentile according to information provided to the Compensation Committee
by Cogent. For 2007, Mr. Keane received an annual incentive bonus of $156,250. Mr. Keane’s sole
performance measure in determining his annual incentive bonus is budgeted EBITDA and Mr. Keane
exceeded his EBITDA performance goals.

     In connection with his employment agreement, Mr. Keane was awarded 45,000 shares of restricted
stock in 2007. This award was made in part as consideration for his role in the revenue growth of
his division over the past 5 years. In 2003 AirComp LLC had revenues of $6.7 million and EBITDA of
$1.2 million. Under the leadership of Mr. Keane, in 2007 AirComp LLC had revenues of $51 million
and EBITDA of $16.8 million. In addition, the equity award was made to further retain and motivate
Mr. Keane to continue in our successful growth.

Executive Compensation Policies and Processes

     Equity Award Grant Practices

     We award all stock options to purchase our common stock to executive officers and all other
employees at the market price of our common stock on the grant date. Employees are not allowed to
select the effective date of stock option grants and neither we nor the Compensation Committee has
ever back-dated any option awards. Although the Compensation Committee does not set specific dates
in which it makes equity awards, the Compensation Committee does not time its approval of equity
awards around the release of any material non-public information.

     Policy Regarding Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code

     Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code generally limits our ability to take a federal
income tax deduction for compensation paid to our named executive officers in excess of $1 million.
The stock options we grant have been structured to qualify as performance-based so they are not
subject to this deduction limitation. Although the Compensation Committee will seek to utilize
deductible forms of compensation to the extent practicable, it believes it is important to preserve
flexibility in administering compensation programs. Accordingly, we have not adopted a policy that
all compensation must qualify as deductible under Section 162(m).

-13-



Table of Contents

     For 2007, our executive compensation had the following implications under Section 162(m) of
the Internal Revenue Code:




 
•
 
Base salaries for all named executive officers were fully deductible in 2007 as each
of those salaries were under $1 million.


 

 
•
 
Stock options awards were granted under the stockholder approved 2006 Incentive Plan
and are deductible as performance-based compensation under Section 162(m).



     The restricted shares granted to our CEO in connection with his employment agreement were
granted under the stockholder approved 2006 Incentive Plan and are deductible as performance-based
compensation because they vest only upon the achievement of certain performance goals.

     Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines

     We do not currently have any policy or guidelines that require a specified ownership of our
common stock by our directors or executive officers or stock retention guidelines applicable to
equity-based awards granted to directors and executive officers. However, the Compensation
Committee has committed itself to working with Cogent Compensation Partners, Inc. to develop and
establish stock ownership requirements. The Compensation Committee believes that establishing
ownership guidelines will more closely align our key executives’ interests with those of our
stockholders. The Compensation Committee will establish target ownership requirements by
conducting a study into the market levels of required ownership.

Compensation Committee Report

     The Compensation Committee has reviewed and discussed the Compensation Discussion and Analysis
required by Item 402(b) of Regulation S-K with management and, based on such review and
discussions, the Compensation Committee recommended to the board of directors that the Compensation
Discussion and Analysis be included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the year ended
December 31, 2007.



 
 
 
 
 


 
The Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors
 
 

 

 
 

 
Ali H. M. Afdhal 
 

 
Zane Tankel 
 


 


-14-



Table of Contents

Summary Compensation Table

     The following table provides a summary of the cash and non-cash compensation for the year
ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 for each of (1) the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief
Financial Officer and (2) each of our three most highly compensated executive officers during 2007
other than the Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer. We refer to these executives
collectively as the named executive officers.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Equity
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stock
 
Option
 
Incentive Plan
 
All Other
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Salary
 
Bonus
 
Awards(1)
 
Awards(2)
 
Compensation
 
Compensation(5)
 
Total


Name and Principal Position
 
Year
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)(3)
 
($)
 
($)




 


Munawar H. Hidayatallah 
 
 
2007
 
 
 
475,000
 
 
 
100,000
 
 
 
2,013,444
 
 
 
547,115
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
139,034
 
 
 
3,274,593
 


Chairman & Chief Executive
 
 
2006
 
 
 
400,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
845,694
 
 
 
400,000
 
 
 
88,240
 
 
 
1,733,934
 


Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Victor M. Perez
 
 
2007
 
 
 
270,833
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63,608
 
 
 
81,912
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
43,000
 
 
 
459,353
 


Chief Financial Officer
 
 
2006
 
 
 
248,833
 
 
 
100,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
212,551
 
 
 
120,000
 
 
 
21,801
 
 
 
703,185
 


Theodore F. Pound 
 
 
2007
 
 
 
240,833
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
6,346
 
 
 
65,852
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
29,751
 
 
 
342,782
 


General Counsel and Secretary
 
 
2006
 
 
 
205,500
 
 
 
100,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
230,142
 
 
 
90,000
 
 
 
15,923
 
 
 
641,565
 


David K. Bryan 
 
 
2007
 
 
 
250,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
309,877
 
 
 
5,284
 
 
 
231,250
 
 
 
21,148
 
 
 
817,559
 


President and Chief
 
 
2006
 
 
 
187,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
33,038
 
 
 
174,996
 
 
 
12,941
 
 
 
407,975
 


Executive Officer of Strata
Directional Technology LLC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Terrence P. Keane(4) 
 
 
2007
 
 
 
202,404
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
287,653
 
 
 
38,399
 
 
 
156,250
 
 
 
40,393
 
 
 
725,099
 


Senior Vice
President—Oilfield Services
 
 
2006
 
 
 
172,038
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
128,957
 
 
 
87,500
 
 
 
16,062
 
 
 
404,557
 





 








(1)
 
The amounts indicated represent the aggregate dollar amount of compensation expense, excluding the
reduction for risk of forfeiture, related to restricted stock awards recognized in our financial
statements during fiscal year 2007. The expense was determined in accordance with FAS 123(R) as
disclosed in Notes 1 and 10 to our financial statements included in our annual report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2007.

 

(2)
 
The amounts indicated represent the aggregate dollar amount of compensation expense, excluding the
reduction for risk of forfeiture, related to stock option awards recognized in our financial statements
during fiscal year 2007 and includes amounts from awards granted prior to 2007. The expense was
determined in accordance with FAS 123(R) as disclosed in Notes 1 and 10 to our financial statements
included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007.

 

(3)
 
The amounts indicated represent annual incentive compensation paid pursuant to each executives
employment agreement.

 

(4)
 
Mr. Keane’s promotion to Senior Vice President—Oilfield Services was effective January 29, 2008.
During 2007, Mr. Keane served as President and Chief Executive Officer of AirComp LLC.

 

(5)
 
The following table provides a summary of the All Other Compensation column and includes all perquisites:


-15-



Table of Contents

Summary of All Other Compensation





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
401(k) plan
 
 
 
 
 
Allis-Chalmers
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Health
 
Matching
 
Car
 
Provided
 
Other Personal
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Benefits (1)
 
Contributions
 
Allowance
 
Car (2)
 
Benefits (3)
 
Total


Name
 
Year
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)




Munawar H. Hidayatallah
 
 
2007
 
 
 
62,788
 
 
 
7,500
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
12,302
 
 
 
56,444
 
 
 
139,034
 


 
 
 
2006
 
 
 
27,832
 
 
 
3,750
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
7,023
 
 
 
49,635
 
 
 
88,240
 


Victor M. Perez
 
 
2007
 
 
 
23,513
 
 
 
7,488
 
 
 
12,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
43,001
 


 
 
 
2006
 
 
 
10,723
 
 
 
4,578
 
 
 
6,500
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
21,801
 


Theodore F. Pound
 
 
2007
 
 
 
10,001
 
 
 
7,750
 
 
 
12,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
29,751
 


 
 
 
2006
 
 
 
9,623
 
 
 
4,800
 
 
 
1,500
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15,923
 


David K. Bryan
 
 
2007
 
 
 
10,801
 
 
 
4,347
 
 
 
6,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
21,148
 


 
 
 
2006
 
 
 
6,941
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
6,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
12,941
 


Terrence P. Keane
 
 
2007
 
 
 
22,418
 
 
 
5,975
 
 
 
12,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
40,393
 


 
 
 
2006
 
 
 
5,751
 
 
 
2,311
 
 
 
8,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
16,062
 





 








(1)
 
The amounts indicated represent actual health benefit premiums and expenses paid by Allis-Chalmers.

 

(2)
 
We provide a company car and driver to Mr. Hidayatallah for business reasons and for commuting to
and from the office. The cost of the driver was determined by allocating a portion of the total
actual employment costs of the administrative employee based on amount of driving time per
employee. The cost of the company car was determined by allocating a portion of the car purchase
price (total cost divided by three for the expected usage of the car in years), annual cost of
insurance, maintenance and other costs based on mileage incurred for commuting and personal use by
each employee.

 

(3)
 
Other personal benefits for Mr. Hidayatallah include $23,415 in Allis-Chalmers-paid airline
flights and $33,029 in apartment and utility costs for the corporate apartment in Houston, Texas
for the fiscal year 2007.


-16-



Table of Contents


      Grant of Plan-Based Awards

     The following table sets forth the grants of plan-based awards for 2007 as a dollar amount for
each of the named executive officers. All equity-based awards were granted under our 2006
Incentive Plan.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All other stock awards:
 
All other option awards:
 
 
 
 
 
Grant Date Fair


 
 
 
 
 
 
Estimated Future Payouts Under
 
Estimated Future Payouts Under
 
Number of shares
 
Number of Securities
 
Exercise or
 
Value of Stock


 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Equity Incentive Plan Awards (1)
 
Equity Incentive Plan Awards (2)
 
of stock
 
Underlying
 
Base Price of
 
and Option


 
 
 
 
 
 
Threshold
 
Target
 
Maximum
 
Threshold
 
Target
 
Maximum
 
or Units
 
Options
 
Option Awards
 
Awards


Name
 
Grant Date
 
$
 
$
 
$
 
#
 
#
 
#
 
#(3)
 
#(4)
 
$/sh
 
$(5)




Munawar H.
Hidayatallah
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
475,000
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
8/3/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200,000
 
 
 
21.95
 
 
 
2,607,824
 


 
 
 
9/17/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
685,000
 
 
 
685,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11,390,358
 


Victor M. Perez
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
139,750
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
8/3/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
15,000
 
 
 
15,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21..95
 
 
 
165,056
 


 
 
 
8/3/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
25,000
 
 
 
25,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
462,946
 


Theodore F. Pound
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
12/3/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
231,150
 


David K. Bryan
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
218,500
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
6/14/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37,500
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
830,250
 


 
 
 
10/14/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,440,750
 


Terrence P. Keane
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
212,500
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
6/14/2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
996,300
 





 








(1)
 
Reflects each named executive officer’s target amount of the annual
cash incentive bonus under our non-equity incentive compensation plan
for 2007. The amounts of the performance bonus awards made to the
named executive officers pursuant to the incentive compensation plan
for 2007 are set forth in the Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation
column of the Summary Compensation Table above.

 

(2)
 
The amounts indicated represent performance based restricted stock
awards and options granted during fiscal year 2007. The vesting
schedules, upon satisfying performance criteria, for the awards
granted during the fiscal year 2007 are disclosed in footnotes 2, 6
and 7 in the following Outstanding Equity Awards table.

 

(3)
 
The amounts indicated represent restricted stock awards granted during
fiscal year 2007. The vesting schedules for restricted stock awards
granted during the fiscal year 2007 are disclosed in the footnotes in
the following Outstanding Equity Awards table.

 

(4)
 
The amounts indicated represent options granted during fiscal year
2007. The vesting schedules for option awards granted during the
fiscal year 2007 are disclosed in the footnotes in the following
Outstanding Equity Awards table.

 

(5)
 
The valuation of restricted stock awards and stock options were
determined in accordance with FAS 123(R) as disclosed in Notes 1 and
10 to our financial statements included in our annual report on Form
10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007.


-17-



Table of Contents

Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End 2007

     The following table sets forth information regarding outstanding equity awards for each of our
named executive officers for 2007.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Options Awards
 
Stock Awards


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity Incentive


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity Incentive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity Incentive
 
Plan Awards:


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plan Awards:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plan Awards:
 
Market or


 
 
Number of
 
Number of
 
Number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number
 
Payout Value


 
 
Securities
 
Securities
 
Securities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of
 
Market Value
 
of Unearned
 
of Unearned


 
 
Underlying
 
Underlying
 
Underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shares or
 
of Shares or
 
Shares, Units
 
Shares, Units


 
 
Unexercised
 
Unexercised
 
Unexercised
 
Option
 
 
 
 
 
Units of Stock
 
Units of Stock
 
or Other Rights
 
or Other Rights


 
 
Options
 
Options
 
Unearned
 
Exercise
 
Option
 
That Have
 
That Have
 
That Have
 
That Have


 
 
#
 
#
 
Options
 
Price
 
Expiration
 
Not Vested
 
Not Vested
 
Not Vested
 
Not Vested


Name
 
Exercisable
 
Unexercisable
 
#
 
$
 
Date
 
#
 
$(1)
 
#
 
$(1)




 


Munawar H.
Hidayatallah
 
 
200,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.86
 
 
 
2/2/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
83,333
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.85
 
 
 
12/15/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.95
 
 
 
8/3/2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
685,000      
(6)
 
 
10,103,750
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Victor M. Perez
 
 
25,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.85
 
 
 
11/13/2014
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
45,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.85
 
 
 
12/15/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15,000      
(2)
 
 
21.95
 
 
 
8/3/2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25,000      
(7)
 
 
368,750
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Theodore F. Pound
III
 
 
40,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.85
 
 
 
11/13/2014
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
50,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.85
 
 
 
12/15/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15,000      
(3)
 
 
221,250
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


David K. Bryan
 
 
20,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.87
 
 
 
5/24/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37,500      
(4)
 
 
553,125
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75,000      
(5)
 
 
1,106,250
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Terrence P. Keane
 
 
15,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.87
 
 
 
5/24/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
25,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.85
 
 
 
12/15/2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45,000      
(4)
 
 
663,750
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 








(1)
 
The values represented have been calculated by multiplying $14.75, the
closing price of our common stock on December 31, 2007, by the number
of shares of restricted stock.

 

(2)
 
The performance-based stock options were granted on August 3, 2007 and
vest 20% on August 3, 2008, 20% on August 3, 2009 and 60% on August 3,
2010. Alternatively, the award vests 100% on August 3, 2010 if
certain performance goals are met. Vesting is also contingent on
continued employment.

 

(3)
 
The restricted stock awards were granted on December 3, 2007 and vest
20% on December 3, 2008, 20% on December 3, 2009 and 60% on December
3, 2010.

 

(4)
 
The restricted stock awards were granted on June 14, 2007 and vest 20%
on June 14, 2008, 20% on June 14, 2009 and 60% on June 14, 2010.

 

(5)
 
The restricted stock awards were granted on October 4, 2007 and vest
20% on October 4, 2008, 20% on October 4, 2009 and 60% on October 4,
2010.

 

(6)
 
The performance-based restricted stock awards were granted on
September 17, 2007 and vest one-third each on April 1, 2008, 2009 and
2010 if certain performance goals are met. Alternatively, the award
vests 100% on April 1, 2010 if certain performance goals are met.
Vesting is also contingent on continued employment, except in the case
of death or disability.

 

(7)
 
The performance-based restricted stock awards were granted on August
3, 2007 and vest 20% on August 3, 2008, 20% on August 3, 2009 and 60%
on August 3, 2010. Alternatively, the award vests 100% on the third
anniversary date if certain performance goals are met. Vesting is
also contingent on continued employment.


-18-



Table of Contents

     Option Exercises and Stock Vested During Fiscal Year 2007

The following table sets forth information concerning each exercise of stock options and each
vesting of stock, including restricted stock and similar instruments, during 2007 for each of our
named executive officers on an aggregated basis.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Option Awards


 
 
Number of Shares
 
Value Realized


 
 
Acquired on Exercise
 
on Exercise


Name
 
(#)
 
($)




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Munawar H. Hidayatallah
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 


Victor M. Perez
 
 
18,000
 
 
$
271,616
 


Theodore F. Pound III
 
 
10,000
 
 
$
161,538
 


David K. Bryan
 
 
35,000
 
 
$
536,099
 


Terrence P. Keane
 
 
10,000
 
 
$
146,315
 




Director Compensation for Fiscal Year 2007

     Our current policy is to pay each of our non-management directors (currently all directors
other than Messrs. Adams, Hidayatallah and Toboroff) a retainer of $10,000 each quarter. Each
non-management director serving on a committee of the board of directors will receive an additional
$1,500 each quarter for service on such committee, and each non-management director serving as
chairman or co-chairman of a committee of the board of directors will receive an additional $1,500
each quarter for acting as chairman or co-chairman of such committee. In addition, our “audit
committee financial expert” will receive an additional $12,500 on a quarterly basis. For the first
three quarters of 2007, each non-management director received a retainer of $8,750 each quarter.
Each non-management director serving on a committee of the board of directors received an
additional $1,250 each quarter for service on such committee, and each non-management director
serving as chairman or co-chairman of a committee of the board of directors received an additional
$2,500 each quarter for acting as chairman or co-chairman of such committee. In addition, our
“audit committee financial expert” receive an additional $7,500 on a quarterly basis. Directors
are also compensated for out-of-pocket travel expenses.

     The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation of each of our
directors during 2007.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Fees Earned or
 
Stock
 
Option
 
All Other
 
 


 
 
Paid in Cash
 
Awards(1)
 
Awards
 
Compensation
 
Total


Name
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)




 


Burt A.
Adams(2)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 


Ali H.M. Afdhal
 
 
50,000
 
 
 
63,104      
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
113,104
 


Alejandro Bulgheroni
 
 
35,000
 
 
 
63,104      
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
98,104
 


Carlos Bulgheroni
 
 
35,000
 
 
 
63,104      
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
98,104
 


Victor F. Germack
 
 
90,000
 
 
 
63,104      
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
153,104
 


James M. Hennessy
 
 
26,250
 
 
 
37,655      
(5)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
63,905
 


Munawar H.
Hidayatallah(2)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 




-19-



Table of Contents





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Fees Earned or
 
Stock
 
Option
 
All Other
 
 


 
 
Paid in Cash
 
Awards(1)
 
Awards
 
Compensation
 
Total


Name
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)
 
($)




 


John E. McConnaughy Jr.
 
 
50,000
 
 
 
63,104
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
113,104
 


Robert E. Nederlander
 
 
55,000
 
 
 
63,104
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
118,104
 


Zane Tankel
 
 
38,913
 
 
 
46,888      
(6)
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
85,801
 


Leonard
Toboroff(2)
 
 
156,250      
(3)
 
 
64,934      
(4)
 
 
—
 
 
 
23,683      
(7)
 
 
244,867
 





 








(1)
 
The amounts indicated represent the aggregate dollar amount of
compensation expense, excluding the reduction for risk of forfeiture,
related to restricted stock awards recognized in our financial
statements during fiscal year 2007 and includes amounts from awards
granted prior to 2007. The expense was determined in accordance with
FAS 123(R) as disclosed in Notes 1 and 10 to our financial statements
included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2007. As of December 31, 2007, each of our directors, except for
Messrs. Adams and Hidayatallah, owned 4,000 shares of restricted stock
that vests on October 4, 2008.

 

(2)
 
Employee directors do not receive any additional compensation
for serving on the board of directors.

 

(3)
 
This amount includes consulting fees paid to Mr. Toboroff of $12,500
per month from January 2007 through September 2007 and $15,000 per
month beginning October 2007, pursuant to an oral consulting agreement
with Mr. Toboroff.

 

(4)
 
Directors were granted 4,000 restricted stock awards on October 4,
2007 with a grant date fair value of $76,840. The valuation of
restricted stock awards were determined in accordance with FAS 123(R)
as disclosed in Notes 1 and 10 to our financial statements included in
our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007.

 

(5)
 
Mr. Hennessy was granted 4,000 shares of restricted stock on October
4, 2007 with a grant date fair value of $76,840 and 1,200 shares of
restricted stock on December 20, 2007 with a grant date fair value of
$18,468. The valuation of restricted stock awards were determined in
accordance with FAS 123(R) as disclosed in Notes 1 and 10 to our
financial statements included in our annual report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2007.

 

(6)
 
Mr. Tankel was granted 4,000 shares of restricted stock on October 4,
2007 with a grant date fair value of $76,840 and 1,800 shares of
restricted stock on December 20, 2007 with a grant date fair value of
$27,702. The valuation of restricted stock awards were determined in
accordance with FAS 123(R) as disclosed in Notes 1 and 10 to our
financial statements included in our annual report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2007.

 

(7)
 
This amount includes actual health benefit premiums paid by
Allis-Chalmers.


Employment Agreements and Change-in-Control Arrangements with Management

     The following is a description of the employment agreements and change-in-control arrangements
that are currently in effect with respect to each named executive officer. The amount of
compensation payable to each named executive officer upon termination with or without cause,
termination due to death or disability, and various change-in-control
scenarios is shown below. The amounts shown assume that such termination was effective as of
December 31, 2007, and thus includes amounts earned through such time and are estimates of the
amounts which would be paid out to the executives upon their termination. The actual amounts to be
paid out can only be determined at the time of such executive’s separation from us.

Employment Agreements

     Munawar H. Hidayatallah serves as our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer pursuant to the
terms of a three-year employment agreement effective as of April 1, 2007. Under the terms of his
employment agreement, Mr. Hidayatallah receives an annual base salary of $500,000 subject to an
annual increase. In addition, Mr. Hidayatallah is entitled to receive a bonus in an amount equal
to 100% of his base salary if he meets certain strategic objectives specified in the agreement.
Mr. Hidayatallah is also entitled to four weeks vacation per year and is eligible to participate in
all employee incentive compensation plans and to receive all of the fringe benefits provided to all
employees. Pursuant to the agreement, Mr. Hidayatallah was permitted to assume ownership on his
life insurance policy that was held by Allis-Chalmers. The agreement also provides for (a) tax
gross-up payments for taxes incurred under Section 4999 of the Internal Revenue Code, (b)
reimbursement of legal fees incurred in connection with the negotiation of his employment agreement
and (c) reimbursements for travel and lodging related to Mr. Hidayatallah’s travel from his
principal residence to our headquarters in Houston, Texas. Mr. Hidayatallah is also subject to
customary non-compete provisions for a period of two years after
termination of his agreement. Information
with respect to compensation upon termination with or without cause, termination due to death or
disability, and upon a change-in-control is set forth below under “Severance and Change
in Control Arrangements.”

-20-



Table of Contents

     Victor M. Perez serves as our Chief Financial Officer pursuant to the terms of a three-year
employment agreement effective as of April 3, 2007. Under the terms of the employment agreement,
Mr. Perez receives an annual base salary of $286,000 subject to an annual increase in the
discretion of the board of directors. In addition, Mr. Perez is entitled to receive a bonus in an
amount equal to up to 50% of his base salary if he meets certain strategic objectives specified in
his employment agreement. Mr. Perez is also entitled to four
weeks vacation per year, a $1,000 monthly car allowance and is
eligible to participate in all employee incentive compensation plans and to receive all of the
fringe benefits provided to all employees. Mr. Perez is subject to customary non-compete and
non-solicitation provisions for the term of his agreement. Information with respect to
compensation upon termination with or without cause, termination due
to death or disability, or upon a change-in-control is set forth below under “Severance and Change in Control
Arrangements.”

     Theodore F. Pound III serves as our General Counsel and Secretary pursuant to the terms of a
three-year employment agreement dated as of December 3, 2007. Under the terms of the employment
agreement, Mr. Pound receives an annual base salary of $250,000 subject to an annual increase in
the discretion of the board of directors. In addition, Mr. Pound is entitled to receive a bonus in
an amount equal to up to 50% of his base salary if he meets certain strategic objectives specified
in his employment agreement. Mr. Pound is also entitled to four weeks vacation per year, a $1,000
monthly car allowance and is eligible to participate in all employee incentive compensation plans
and to receive all of the fringe benefits provided to all employees. Mr. Pound is subject to
customary non-compete and non-solicitation provisions for the term of his agreement. Information
with respect to compensation upon termination with or without cause, termination due to death or
disability, or upon a change-in-control is set forth below under “Severance and Change
in Control Arrangements.”

     David K.
Bryan, President and Chief Executive Officer of our subsidiary Strata Directional
Technology LLC, or Strata, is employed pursuant to a three-year employment agreement effective July
1, 2007. Under the terms of the employment agreement, Mr. Bryan receives an annual base salary of
$250,000 subject to an annual increase in the discretion of the board of directors. In addition,
Mr. Bryan is entitled to receive a bonus based on budgeted EBITDA provided that Strata meets
designated minimum earnings targets and provided further that such bonus shall not exceed 100% of
Mr. Bryan’s base salary. The bonus calculation is subject to adjustment in subsequent years. Mr.
Bryan is also entitled to four weeks vacation per year, a $1,000 monthly car allowance, and is
eligible to participate in all employee incentive compensation plans and to receive all of the
fringe benefits provided to all employees. Mr. Bryan is also subject to customary non-compete and
non-solicitation provisions for the term of his agreement. Information with respect to
compensation upon termination with or without cause, termination due
to death or disability, or upon a change-in-control is set forth below under “Severance and Change in Control
Arrangements.”

     Terrence P. Keane was promoted to Senior Vice President—Oilfield Services in January 2008 and
his base salary was increased to $250,000. Prior to his promotion, Mr. Keane served as President
of Aircomp LLC. In connection with such promotion, we amended Mr. Keane’s previous employment
agreement in April 2008. Pursuant to the amended agreement, Mr. Keane is entitled to a base salary
of $275,000, subject to an annual increase in the discretion of the board of directors. For 2008,
Mr. Keane is entitled to receive (1) a bonus of up to 50% of his base salary based upon AirComp LLC
meeting budgeted EBITDA targets established by management for the first six months of 2008 and (2)
a bonus of up to 50% based upon our Oilfield Services segment meeting budgeted EBITDA targets
established by our management for the last six months of 2008. For the remaining term of his
agreement, Mr. Keane is entitled to receive a bonus of up to 100% of his base salary based upon our
Oilfield Services segment meeting budgeted EBITDA targets
established by management. Mr. Keane is also entitled to six weeks vacation per year and is
eligible to participate in all employee incentive compensation plans and to receive all of the
fringe benefits provided to all employees. In addition, Mr. Keane is entitled to a $1,000 monthly
car allowance. The employment agreement also contains customary non-compete and non-solicitation
provisions. Information with respect to compensation upon termination with or without cause,
termination due to death or disability, or upon a change-in-control is set forth below
under “Severance and Change in Control Arrangements.”

Severance and Change in Control Arrangements

     The following severance and change in control arrangements apply to each of the named
executive officers, who are referred to as an “executive” for purposes of this discussion.

     Each executive’s employment agreement provides that if his employment is terminated by us upon
his death, disability or for cause, we will pay him his earned but unpaid salary as of the date of
termination, any unpaid expense

-21-



Table of Contents

reimbursements, compensation for accrued, unused vacation as of the date of termination and
any further compensation that may be provided by the terms of any benefit plans in which he
participates and the terms of any outstanding equity grants. Termination for “Cause” for Messrs.
Hidayatallah, Perez and Pound shall occur immediately if the executive commits (1) a criminal act
involving dishonesty or moral turpitude or (2) a material breach of any of the terms and provisions
of his employment agreement or fails to obey written directions by our President or Chief Executive
Officer (or, in the case of Mr. Hidayatallah, our board of directors) which are not inconsistent
with his employment agreement. Messrs. Bryan and Keane’s employment agreements defines “Cause” to
mean:




 
•
 
the commission of any act of dishonesty, fraud, misrepresentation,
misappropriation, or embezzlement involving Allis-Chalmers;


 

 
•
 
the unauthorized use or disclosure of any confidential information or trade
secrets of Allis-Chalmers;


 

 
•
 
any violation of a law or regulation applicable to our business, which violation
does or is reasonably like to cause material injury to Allis-Chalmers;


 

 
•
 
executive’s conviction of, or plea of nolo contendere or guilty to (a) a felony
or (b) any other crime which involves moral turpitude;


 

 
•
 
executive’s continued failure, in the sole discretion of the board, to perform
the principal duties, functions and responsibilities of his position (other than any
such failure resulting from executive’s disability) or to follow the directives of
the board after written notice from Allis-Chalmers identifying the deficiencies in
performance and a reasonable cure period of not less than thirty (30) days of any
breach capable of cure;


 

 
•
 
gross negligence or willful misconduct in the performance of executive’s duties;
or


 

 
•
 
a material and willful breach of executive’s fiduciary duties to Allis-Chalmers.



     Each executive’s employment agreement provides that if his employment is terminated by us
without cause or if the executive resigns within a six month period of being constructively
terminated (as defined below), we will pay him his earned but unpaid salary, unearned salary for
the lesser of one year following termination of employment or the remainder of the employment
agreement (except for Messrs. Bryan and Keane who will receive payments through the end of their
employment agreement and Mr. Hidayatallah who will receive payments equal to three times his then
current annual salary) in semi-monthly payments, any unpaid expense reimbursements, compensation
for accrued, unused vacation as of the date of termination and any further compensation that may be
provided by the terms of any benefit plans in which he participates and the terms of any
outstanding equity grants. In general, a “constructive termination” would occur if we:




 
•
 
demote the executive to a lesser position, either in title or responsibility;,


 

 
•
 
decrease the executive’s salary or benefits below the highest level in effect at
anytime during his employment;,


 

 
•
 
require the executive to relocate to a principal place of business more than 50
miles from our current principal place of business, with certain exceptions;,


 

 
•
 
are subject to a change in control (as defined below), unless executive accepts
employment with the successor; or


 

 
•
 
breach any other material term of the employment agreement which is not cured
within 30 days after receiving notice of such breach.



     A “change in control” as defined in the employment agreements includes:

-22-



Table of Contents




 
•
 
the acquisition by any individual, entity or group, or person of ownership of
more than 50% of either (1) the then outstanding shares of common stock or (2) the
combined voting power of our then outstanding voting securities entitled to vote,
with certain exceptions;


 

 
•
 
individuals who currently constitute the board of directors cease for any reason
to constitute at least a majority of the board, with several exceptions;


 

 
•
 
a complete liquidation or dissolution of Allis-Chalmers; or


 

 
•
 
(a) the consummation of a reorganization, merger or consolidation or (b) the sale
or other disposition of all or substantially all of our assets unless, in each case,
immediately following the event






 
•
 
Our stockholders immediately before the event own, directly or indirectly,
at least 50% of the combined voting power of our then outstanding voting
securities in substantially the same proportion as their ownership of us, or


 

 
•
 
At least a majority of the members of the board of directors of the entity
resulting from the transaction were members of the incumbent board at the time
of the execution of the agreement providing for the transaction.



-23-



Table of Contents

     The following table sets forth the estimated payments and benefits that would be provided to
each named executive officer, other than Mr. Hidayatallah, if such officer’s employment had been
terminated on December 31, 2007 by us without cause or upon a change of control:





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Value of Unvested
 
Value of Unvested
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity Awards if
 
Equity Awards if
 
 
 
 
 
Total if


 
 
Salary
 
Change of
 
Terminated Without
 
Total if Change
 
Terminated


Name
 
Continuation
 
Control(1)
 
Cause
 
of Control
 
Without Cause




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Victor M. Perez,
 
$
286,000
 
 
$
368,750
 
 
 
—
 
 
$
654,750
 
 
$
286,000
 


Chief Financial
Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Theodore F. Pound
 
$
250,000
 
 
$
221,250
(2)
 
 
—
 
 
$
471,250
 
 
$
250,000
 


III, General
Counsel and
Secretary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


David Bryan,
 
$
625,000
 
 
$
1,659,375
(2)
 
 
—
 
 
$
2,284,375
 
 
$
625,000
 


President and Chief
Executive Officer
of Strata
Directional
Technology LLC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Terrence P. Keane,
 
$
562,500
 
 
$
663,750
(2)
 
 
—
 
 
$
1,226,250
 
 
$
562,500
 


Senior Vice
President—Oilfield
Services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 








(1)
 
The amounts in this column represent unvested restricted
stock that have been valued by multiplying $14.75, the
closing price of a share of our common stock on December 31, 2007, by the number of shares
of restricted stock held by each named executive officer that would vest.

 

(2)
 
The equity awards represented by this column would vest only if there was a change of
control of Allis-Chalmers and the successor company refused to assume or continue the
agreement covering these shares.


-24-



Table of Contents

     The following table sets for the estimated payments and benefits that would be provided to Mr.
Hidayatallah if his employment had been terminated on December 31, 2007 by us due to his death or
disability, with or without cause or upon a change of control:





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Salary
 
Value of Unvested
 
 


Event
 
Continuation
 
Equity Awards (1)
 
Total




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Death
 
 
—
 
 
$
10,103,750
 
 
$
10,103,750
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Disability
 
 
—
 
 
$
10,103,750
 
 
$
10,103,750
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


For Cause
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Without Cause
 
$
1,500,000
 
 
$
10,103,750
 
 
$
11,603,750
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Change of Control
 
$
1,500,000
 
 
$
10,103,750
 
 
$
11,603,750
 





 








(1)
 
This amount represents 685,000 shares of performance-based restricted stock
multiplied by $14.75, the closing price of a share of our common stock on December 31,
2007.


COMPENSATION COMMITTEE INTERLOCKS AND INSIDER PARTICIPATION

     The Compensation Committee of our board of directors currently consists of Messrs. Afdhal and
Tankel. Mr. Freedman resigned as a member of our board of directors and as a member of our
Compensation Committee, effective April 17, 2007. Mr. Freedman served as our Executive Vice
President during 2002 and currently serves as our Vice President—Investor Relations. No current
executive officer has ever served as a member of the board of directors or compensation committee
of any other entity (other than our subsidiaries) that has or has had one or more executive
officers serving as a member of our board or our Compensation Committee.




ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTER

Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans

     The following table provides information as of December 31, 2007 with respect to the shares of
our common stock that may be issued under our existing equity compensation plans.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Number of
 
 
 
 


 
 
Securities to be
 
Weighted
 
 


 
 
Issued Upon
 
Average Exercise
 
Number of Securities


 
 
Exercise of
 
Price of
 
Remaining Available


 
 
Outstanding
 
Outstanding
 
for Future Issuance


 
 
Options, Warrants
 
Options, Warrants
 
Under Equity


Plan Category
 
And Rights
 
and Rights
 
Compensation Plans




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Equity compensation plans approved by security holders
 
 
1,696,763
 
 
$
6.86
 
 
 
527,131
 


Equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
 
 
4,000
 
 
$
13.75
 
 
 
—
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Total
 
 
1,700,763
 
 
$
10.78
 
 
 
527,131
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Equity Compensation Plans Not Approved By Security Holders

     These plans comprise the following:

     In 1999 and 2000, we compensated former and continuing members of our board of directors who
had served from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation by issuing promissory notes totaling
$325,000 and by granting stock options to these same individuals. Options to purchase 4,800 shares
of common stock were granted with an exercise price of $13.75. These options vested immediately
and expire in March 2010. As of December 31, 2007, 4,000 of these

-25-



Table of Contents

options remain outstanding.

     In connection with the private placement in April 2004, we issued warrants for the purchase of
800,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $2.50 per share. A total of 486,557 of
these warrants were exercised in 2005
and the remaining warrants were exercised in 2006. Warrants for 4,000 shares of our common
stock at an exercise price of $4.65 were also issued in May 2004 and were exercised in January
2007.

Securities Ownership of Management and Certain Beneficial Owners

     The following table sets forth the beneficial ownership of outstanding shares of our common
stock as of April 10, 2008 for:




 
•
 
each of the named executive officers;


 

 
•
 
each of our directors;


 

 
•
 
all of our directors and executive officers as a group; and


 

 
•
 
each other person known by us to be a beneficial owner of more than 5% of our
outstanding common stock.



     Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC. Under the rules of
the SEC, a person is deemed to be a “beneficial owner” of a security if that person has or shares
“voting power,” which includes the power to vote or to direct the voting of such security, or
“investment power,” which includes the power to dispose of or to direct the disposition of such
security. A person is also deemed to be a beneficial owner of any securities of which that person
has a right to acquire beneficial ownership within 60 days. Under these rules, more than one person
may be deemed a beneficial owner of the same securities and a person may be deemed a beneficial
owner of securities as to which he has no economic interest. Except as indicated by footnote, the
persons named in the table below have sole voting and investment power with respect to all shares
shown as beneficially owned by them, subject to community property laws where applicable.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Shares Beneficially Owned(2)


Name and Address(1)
 
Number
 
Percentage




Named Executive Officers:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Munawar H. Hidayatallah(3)
 
 
1,551,044
 
 
 
4.4
 


Victor M. Perez(4)
 
 
70,000
 
 
 
*
 


Theodore F. Pound III(5)
 
 
105,000
 
 
 
*
 


David Bryan(6)
 
 
132,500
 
 
 
*
 


Terrence P. Keane(7)
 
 
85,000
 
 
 
*
 


Directors:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Burt A. Adams Ali H. M. Afdhal
 
 
289,391
 
 
 
*
 


Ali H. M. Afdhal(8)
 
 
7,000
 
 
 
*
 


Alejandro P. Bulgheroni(9)
 
 
2,307,000
 
 
 
6.5
 


Carlos A. Bulgheroni(10)
 
 
1,007,000
 
 
 
2.9
 


Victor F. Germack(11)
 
 
13,000
 
 
 
*
 


James M. Hennessy(12)
 
 
20,200
 
 
 
*
 


John E. McConnaughy, Jr.(13)
 
 
94,000
 
 
 
*
 


Robert E. Nederlander(14)
 
 
654,732
 
 
 
1.9
 


Zane Tankel(15)
 
 
13,800
 
 
 
*
 


Leonard Toboroff(16)
 
 
702,594
 
 
 
2.0
 


All directors and executive officers as a group
(20 persons)
 
 
7,119,927
 
 
 
20.3
 


Other 5% Holders:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Palo Alto Investors(17)
 
 
3,990,817
 
 
 
11.4
 


Artisan Partners Limited Partnership (18).
 
 
1,864,600
 
 
 
5.3
 


Grupo Carso, S.A.B. de C.V. (19)
 
 
2,100,000
 
 
 
6.0
 





 








*
 
Less than one percent.

 

(1)
 
Except as otherwise noted, the address of the directors and executive officers is c/o
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., 5075 Westheimer, Suite 890, Houston, Texas 77056.

 

(2)
 
Based on an aggregate of 35,130,914 shares issued and outstanding as of April 10, 2008.


-26-



Table of Contents








(3)
 
Includes 1,259,711 shares of common stock owned of record by the Hidayatallah Family Trust,
of which Mr. Hidayatallah is the trustee, and 8,000 shares of common stock owned of record by
Munawar Hidayatallah SEP IRA. These shares also include options to purchase 283,333 shares of common stock, which are exercisable within 60 days.
1,259,711 of these shares are held in a margin account.

 

(4)
 
Includes options to purchase 70,000 shares of common stock, which are exercisable within 60 days.

 

(5)
 
Includes 15,000 shares of restricted stock of which 3,000 shares vest on December 3, 2008,
3,000 shares vest on December 3, 2009 and 9,000 shares vest on December 3, 2010. Also
includes options to purchase 90,000 shares of common stock, which are exercisable within 60
days.

 

(6)
 
Includes options to purchase 20,000 shares of common stock, which are exercisable within 60
days. Also includes 37,500 shares of restricted stock of which 7,500 shares vest on June 14,
2008, 7,500 shares vest on June 14, 2009 and 22,500 shares vest on June 14, 2010. Also
includes 75,000 shares of restricted stock of which 7,500 shares vests on October 4, 2009,
15,000 shares vests on October 4, 2010, 30,000 shares vests on October 4, 2011, and 22,500
shares vests on October 4, 2012.

 

(7)
 
Includes 45,000 shares of restricted stock of which 9,000 shares vest on June 14, 2008, 9,000
shares vest on June 14, 2009 and 27,000 shares vest on June 14, 2010. Also includes options
to purchase 40,000 shares of common stock, which are exercisable within 60 days.

 

(8)
 
Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008.

 

(9)
 
Includes (i) 1,000,000 shares held of record by Global Oilfield Holdings Ltd. and (ii)
1,300,000 shares held of record by Associated Petroleum Investors Ltd. Each such entity is
indirectly beneficially owned by Mr. Bulgheroni. Mr. Bulgheroni disclaims beneficial
ownership of these securities except to the extent of his pecuniary interest therein. Also
includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008.

 

(10)
 
Includes 1,000,000 shares held of record by Central Holdings Company Ltd., a British Virgin
Islands international business company, which is indirectly beneficially owned by Mr.
Bulgheroni. Mr. Bulgheroni disclaims beneficial ownership of these securities except to the
extent of his pecuniary interest therein. Also includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that
vest on October 4, 2008.

 

(11)
 
Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008. Mr. Germack’s
address is 845 3rd Avenue, Suite 1410, New York, NY 10022.

 

(12)
 
Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008. Mr. Hennessy’s
address is 7837 N. 54th Street, Paradise Valley, AZ 85253.

 

(13)
 
Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008. Mr. McConnaughy’s
address is 2 Parklands Drive, Darien, CT 06820. 90,000 of these share are held in a margin
account.

 

(14)
 
206,666 of these shares are owned by RER Corp., a corporation controlled by Mr. Nederlander.
Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008. Mr. Nederlander’s
address is 1450 Broadway, Suite 2001, New York, NY 10018.

 

(15)
 
Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008. Mr. Tankel’s address
is 325 North LaSalle Street, Suite 500, Chicago, Illinois 60610.

 

(16)
 
42,860 of these shares are owned by the Leonard Toboroff P.C. Profit Sharing Trust, of which
Mr. Toboroff is the sole trustee and beneficiary, and 5,001 of these shares are owned by Lenny
Corp., of which Mr. Toboroff is the sole shareholder. 655,734 of these shares are held in a
margin account. Includes 4,000 shares of restricted stock that vest on October 4, 2008. Mr.
Toboroff’s address is 1450 Broadway, Suite 2001, New York, NY 10018.


-27-



Table of Contents








(17)
 
Based on information contained in a Schedule 13G/A filed on February 13, 2008, by Palo Alto
Investors, LLC (“PAI”), Palo Alto Investors, William Leland Edwards and Palo Alto Small Cap
Master Fund, L.P. (“Small Cap Master”). PAI is a registered investment adviser and is the
general partner and investment adviser of Small Cap Master and other
investment limited partnerships and the investment adviser to other investment funds. Palo Alto
Investors is the manager of PAI. Mr. Edwards is the controlling shareholder and President of
Palo Alto Investors. PAI’s clients have the right to receive or the power to direct the receipt
of dividends from, or the proceeds from the sale of, the shares. No client, other than Small
Cap Master, separately holds more than five percent of the outstanding shares. Each of PAI,
Palo Alto Investors and Mr. Edwards have shared voting and dispositive power over all of the
shares, Mr. Edwards has sole voting power over 6,500 shares and Small Cap Master has shared
voting and dispositive power over 1,861,050 of the shares. The principal business address of
each of PAI, Palo Alto Investors and Mr. Edwards is 470 University Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94301.
The principal business address of Small Cap Master is c/o Citco Fund Services (Bermuda)
Limited, Washington Mall West, 2nd Floor, 7 Reid Street, Hamilton HM11, Bermuda.

 

(18)
 
Based on information contained in a Schedule 13G filed on February 13, 2008 by Artisan
Partners Limited Partnership, or Artisan Partners, Artisan Investment Corporation, or Artisan
Corp., ZFIC, Inc., or ZFIC, Andrew A. Ziegler and Carlene M. Ziegler. Artisan Partners is an
investment adviser registered under section 203 of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940;
Artisan Corp. is the general partner of Artisan Partners; ZFIC is the sole stockholder of
Artisan Corp. and Mr. Ziegler and Ms. Ziegler are the principal stockholders of ZFIC. Each of
these reporting persons has shared voting power over 1,629,500 of the shares and shared
dispositive power over all of the shares. The principal business address of these reporting
persons is 875 East Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 800, Milwaukee, WI 53202.

 

(19)
 
Based on information contained in a Schedule 13G/A filed on February 13, 2008, these shares
are owned directly by Carso Infraestructura y Construcción, S.A.B. de C.V., or Carso
Infraestructura, and indirectly by Grupo Carso, S.A.B. de C.V., or Grupo Carso and each of
Carlos Slim Helú, Carlos Slim Domit, Marco Antonio Slim Domit, Patrick Slim Domit, María
Soumaya Slim Domit, Vanessa Paola Slim Domit and Johanna Monique Slim Domit (such individuals
are collectively referred to as the “Slim Family”). Grupo Carso owns a majority of the
outstanding voting securities of Carso Infraestructura, and the members of the Slim Family
beneficially own, directly and indirectly, a majority of the outstanding voting equity
securities of Grupo Carso. As a result, each of Carso Infraestructura, Grupo Carso and the
members of the Slim Family may be deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power over the
reported shares. The principal business address for Carso Infraestructura and Grupo Carso is
Miguel de Cervantes Saveedra #255, Col. Granada CP, 11520 México, D.F., México. The principal
business address for each member of the Slim Family is Paseo de las Palmas 736, Colonia Lomas
de Chapultepec, 11000 México, D.F., México.





ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE

Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions

     A majority of DLS’ revenues are currently received pursuant to a strategic agreement with Pan
American Energy, LLC, or Pan American Energy, which is a joint venture owned 60% by British
Petroleum and 40% by Bridas Corporation. Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A. Bulgheroni, members
of our board of directors, may be deemed to indirectly beneficially own all of the outstanding
capital stock of Bridas Corporation and are members of the Management Committee of Pan American
Energy, and, as a result, have a material interest in the transactions contemplated by the
strategic agreement between DLS and Pan American Energy. During 2007, DLS received approximately
$121 million in revenues from services performed for Pan American Energy.

     During
2007, we provided services to Bridas Corporation or its subsidiary,
Buesa Energy, Inc., in an aggregate amount of approximately $2 million. Alejandro P. Bulgheroni, one of our directors,
serves as Chairman of Buesa Energy, Inc.

     We purchase general oilfield supplies and materials from Ralow Services, Inc., or Ralow.
Ralow is owned by Brad A. Adams and Bruce A. Adams who are brothers of Burt A. Adams, a member of
our board of directors and our former President and Chief Operating Officer. During 2007, we
purchased supplies and materials from Ralow in an aggregate amount of approximately $3.5 million.

-28-



Table of Contents

Related Party Transaction Approval Policy

     We do not have a formal related party approval policy for transactions required to be
disclosed pursuant to Item 404(a) of Regulation S-K. However, to identify related party
transactions, each year, we require our directors and officers to complete Director and Officer
Questionnaires identifying any transactions with us in which the officer or director or their
family members have an interest. Our board of directors reviews related party transactions for
potential conflict of interests. In addition, our Code of Business Ethics and Conduct requires all
directors, officers and employees who may have a potential or apparent conflict of interest to
immediately notify our general counsel or chief financial officer.

Director Independence

     Under rules adopted by the New York Stock Exchange, no member of the board of directors
qualifies as independent unless the board of directors affirmatively determines that the director
has no material relationship with us. The board of directors considers all relevant facts and
circumstances in making a determination of independence. In its determination of independence, the
board of directors reviews and considers all relationships and transactions between each director,
his or her family members or any business, charity or other entity in which the director has an
interest, on the one hand, and we, our affiliates or entities in which a member of our senior
management has an interest, on the other. As a result of its independence reviews, the board of
directors has affirmatively determined that Messrs. Afdhal, Hennessy, Germack, McConnaughy,
Nederlander and Tankel are “independent” as that term is defined under the corporate governance
rules of the New York Stock Exchange and applicable rules of the Securities and Exchange
Commission.




ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES

Principal Accounting Fees and Services

     The following table shows the aggregate fees for professional services rendered by UHY LLP
during the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Fiscal Year
 


Fee Category
 
2007
 
 
2006
 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Audit Fees(1)
 
$
1,235,999
 
 
$
629,778
 


Audit Related Fees(2)
 
 
331,657
 
 
 
220,445
 


Tax Fees(3)
 
 
—
 
 
 
48,230
 


All Other Fees(4)
 
 
86,078
 
 
 
296,138
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
$
1,653,734
 
 
$
1,194,591
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 





 








(1)
 
Includes fees paid for audit of our annual financial statements and reviews of the related
quarterly financial statements.

 

(2)
 
Includes fees paid for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to the
performance of the audit or review of our financial statements and are not reported under
“Audit Fees.” These services include accounting and
reporting consultations.

 

(3)
 
Includes tax planning and tax return preparation fees.

 

(4)
 
Includes fees for the review and issuance of consents related to our registration statements
and other SEC filings


-29-



Table of Contents

Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures

     We have adopted a policy that the Audit Committee must approve in advance all audit and
non-audit services provided by our independent accountants. All of the audit and audit-related
services, and the fees therefor, provided by UHY LLP in 2007 and 2006 were pre-approved by the
Audit Committee.

-30-



Table of Contents




PART IV




ITEM 15. EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES




(a)
 
(1) Financial Statements


 

 
 
None.






 
(2)
 
Financial Statement Schedules


 

 
 
 
None.






 
(3)
 
Exhibits



     The exhibits listed on the accompanying Exhibit Index are filed as part of this annual
report on Form 10-K/A or incorporated by reference.

-31-



Table of Contents




SIGNATURES

     Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized on April 29, 2008.



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 
 /s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah
 
 

 
Munawar H. Hidayatallah 
 

 
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman 
 


 


     Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, this report has been signed on the date indicated by the following persons on behalf of
the registrant and in the capacities indicated.





 
 
 
 
 


Name
 
Title
 
Date




 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah

 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer

 
April 29, 2008


Munawar H. Hidayatallah

 
(Principle Executive Officer)
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Victor M. Perez

 
Chief Financial Officer

 
April 29, 2008


Victor M. Perez

 
(Principal Financial Officer)
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Bruce Sauers

 
Chief Accounting Officer

 
April 29, 2008


Bruce Sauers

 
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Burt A. Adams

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Burt A. Adams
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Ali H. M. Afdhal

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Ali H. M. Afdhal
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Alejandro P. Bulgheroni

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Alejandro P. Bulgheroni
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Carlos A. Bulgheroni

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Carlos A. Bulgheroni
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Victor F. Germack

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Victor F. Germack
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ James M. Hennessy

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


James M. Hennessy
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ John E. McConnaughy, Jr.

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


John E. McConnaughy, Jr.
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Robert E. Nederlander

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Robert E. Nederlander
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Zane Tankel

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Zane Tankel
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


/s/ Leonard Toboroff

 
Director

 
April 29, 2008


Leonard Toboroff
 
 
 
 




-32-



Table of Contents

EXHIBIT INDEX





 
 
 
 
 


Exhibit
 
Description




 
 
 
 
 


 
2.1
 
 
First Amended Disclosure Statement pursuant to Section 1125 of
the Bankruptcy Code, dated September 14, 1988, which includes the
First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
September 14, 1988 (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated December 1, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.2
 
 
Reorganization Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
between Registrant and John T. Grigsby, Jr., Trustee
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit D of the First Amended and
Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated September 14, 1988
included in Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
December 1, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.3
 
 
Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of May 9, 2001 by and among
Registrant, Allis-Chalmers Acquisition Corp. and Oil Quip
Rentals, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed May 15, 2001).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.4
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement dated February 1, 2002 by and between
Registrant and Jens H. Mortensen, Jr. (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed February 21, 2002).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.5
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement dated February 1, 2002 by and among
Registrant, Energy Spectrum Partners LP, and Strata Directional
Technology, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.10 to
the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2001).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.6
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement dated August 10, 2004 by and among
Allis-Chalmers Corporation and the investors named thereto
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to the Registration
Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 118916) filed on
September 10, 2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.7
 
 
Amendment to Stock Purchase Agreement dated August 10, 2004
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the Registration
Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 118916) filed on
September 10, 2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.8
 
 
Addendum to Stock Purchase Agreement dated September 24, 2004
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.55 to Registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 30, 2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.9
 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement dated November 10, 2004 by and among
AirComp LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Diamond Air
Drilling Services, Inc., a Texas corporation, and Marquis Bit
Co., L.L.C., a New Mexico limited liability company, Greg Hawley
and Tammy Hawley, residents of Texas and Clay Wilson and Linda
Wilson, residents of New Mexico (incorporated by reference to the
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 15, 2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.10
 
 
Purchase Agreement and related Agreements by and among
Allis-Chalmers Corporation, Chevron USA, Inc., Dale Redman and
others dated December 10, 2004 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.63 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on December 16, 2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.11
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement dated April 1, 2005, by and among
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., Thomas Whittington, Sr., Werlyn R.
Bourgeois and SAM and D, LLC. (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.51 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on April 5, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.12
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement effective May 1, 2005, by and among
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., Wesley J. Mahone, Mike T. Wilhite,
Andrew D. Mills and Tim Williams (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.51 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on May 6, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.13
 
 
Purchase Agreement dated July 11, 2005 among Allis-Chalmers
Energy Inc., Mountain Compressed Air, Inc. and M-I, L.L.C.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to the Registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 15, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.14
 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement dated July 11, 2005 between AirComp LLC,
W.T. Enterprises, Inc. and William M. Watts (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.43 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on July 15, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.15
 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement by and between Patterson Services, Inc.
and Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services, Inc. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.44 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on September 8, 2005).




-33-



Table of Contents





 
 
 
 
 


Exhibit
 
Description




 
 
 
 
 


 
2.16
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement dated as of December 20, 2005 between
the Registrant and Joe Van Matre (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.17
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of April 27, 2006, by and
among Bridas International Holdings Ltd., Bridas Central Company
Ltd., Associated Petroleum Investors Limited, and the Registrant.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.3 to the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2006)


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.18
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of October 17, 2006, by and
between Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc. and Randolph J.
Hebert (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on October 19,
2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.19
 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement, dated as of October 25, 2006, by and
between Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and Oil & Gas Rental Services,
Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on October 26,
2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
2.20
 
 
Agreement and Plan of Merger by and among the Registrant, Bronco
Drilling Company, Inc. and Elway Merger Sub, Inc., dated as of
January 23, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the
Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on January 24, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
3.1
 
 
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Registrant
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2001).


 
 
 
 
 


 
3.2
 
 
Certificate of Designation, Preferences and Rights of the Series
A 10% Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock ($.01 Par Value) of
Registrant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed February 21, 2002).


 
 
 
 
 


 
3.3
 
 
Amended and Restated By-laws of Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 3.3. to the Registrant’s Annual Report of
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2001).


 
 
 
 
 


 
3.4
 
 
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation filed
with the Delaware Secretary of State on June 9, 2004
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.3 to the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30,
2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
3.5
 
 
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation filed
with the Delaware Secretary of State on January 5, 2005
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.5 to the Registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed January 11, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
3.6
 
 
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation filed
with the Delaware Secretary of State on August 16, 2005
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.5 to the Registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 17, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.1
 
 
Specimen Stock Certificate of Common Stock of Registrant
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30,
2004).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.2
 
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated as of March 31, 1999, by and
between Allis-Chalmers Corporation and the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3
to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended June 30, 1999).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.3
 
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated April 2, 2004 by and between
Registrant and the Stockholder signatories thereto (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.43 to Amendment No. 1 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2003).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.4
 
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated as of January 29, 2007 by and
among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., the Guarantors named therein
and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on January 29, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.5
 
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated as of January 18, 2006 by and
among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., the Guarantors named therein
and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on January 24, 2006).




-34-



Table of Contents





 
 
 
 
 


Exhibit
 
Description




 
 
 
 
 


 
4.6
 
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated as of August 14, 2006 by and
among the Registrant, the guarantors listed on Schedule A thereto
and RBC Capital Markets Corporation (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on August 14,
2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.7
 
 
Indenture dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among the
Registrant, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank,
N.A., as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 24,
2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.8
 
 
First Supplemental Indenture dated as of August 11, 2006 by and
among Allis-Chalmers GP, LLC, Allis-Chalmers LP, LLC,
Allis-Chalmers Management, LP, Rogers Oil Tool Services, Inc.,
the Registrant, the other Guarantors (as defined in the Indenture
referred to therein) and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on
August 14, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.9
 
 
Second Supplemental Indenture dated as of January 23, 2007 by and
among Petro-Rentals, Incorporated, the Registrant, the other
Guarantor parties thereto and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 24, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.10
 
 
Indenture, dated as of January 29, 2007, by and among the
Registrant, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank,
N.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 29,
2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.11
 
 
Form of 9.0% Senior Note due 2014 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit A to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on January 24, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
4.12
 
 
Form of 8.5% Senior Note due 2017 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit A to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on January 29, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.1
 
 
Amended and Restated Retiree Health Trust Agreement dated
September 14, 1988 by and between Registrant and Wells Fargo Bank
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit C-1 of the First Amended
and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated September 14,
1988 included in Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
December 1, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.2
 
 
Amended and Restated Retiree Health Trust Agreement dated
September 18, 1988 by and between Registrant and Firstar Trust
Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit C-2 of the First
Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated September
14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
dated December 1, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.3
 
 
Product Liability Trust Agreement dated September 14, 1988 by and
between Registrant and Bruce W. Strausberg, Trustee (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit E of the First Amended and Restated Joint
Plan of Reorganization dated September 14, 1988 included in
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated December 1, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.4*
 
 
Allis-Chalmers Savings Plan (incorporated by reference to
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.5*
 
 
Allis-Chalmers Consolidated Pension Plan (incorporated by
reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 1988).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.6
 
 
Agreement dated as of March 31, 1999 by and between Registrant
and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).




-35-



Table of Contents





 
 
 
 
 


Exhibit
 
Description




 
 
 
 
 


 
10.7
 
 
Letter Agreement dated May 9, 2001 by and between Registrant and the Pension Benefit Guarantee
Corporation (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2002).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.8
 
 
Termination Agreement dated May 9, 2001 by and between Registrant, the Pension Benefit Guarantee
Corporation and others (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
May 15, 2002).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.9*
 
 
Executive Employment Agreement, dated April 1, 2007, by and between the Registrant and Munawar H.
Hidayatallah (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on November
6, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.10*
 
 
Executive Employment Agreement, effective April 3, 2007, by and between the Registrant and Victor M.
Perez (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on November 6,
2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.11*
 
 
Executive Employment Agreement, effective July 1, 2007, by and between the Registrant and Terrence P.
Keane (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on July 24, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.12*
 
 
Executive Employment Agreement, dated December 3, 2007, by and between the Registrant and Theodore F.
Pound III (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on December 6,
2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.13*
 
 
Executive Employment Agreement, effective July 1, 2007, by and between the Registrant and David K.
Bryan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on July 13, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.14*
 
 
Employment Agreement, dated December 18, 2006, by and between the Registrant and Burt A. Adams
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
December 19, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.15
 
 
Executive Employment Agreement, effective January 1, 2008, by and between the Registrant and Mark C.
Patterson (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on February 25,
2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.16
 
 
Purchase Agreement dated as of January 12, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc, the Guarantors
named therein and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to
the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 24, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.17
 
 
Purchase Agreement dated as of August 8, 2006 by and between the Registrant, the guarantors listed on
Schedule B thereto and RBC Capital Markets Corporation (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to
the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on August 14, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.18
 
 
Purchase Agreement dated as of January 24, 2007 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., the Guarantors
named therein and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to
the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 29, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.19
 
 
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy
Inc., as borrower, Royal bank of Canada, as administrative agent and Collateral Agent, RBC Capital
Markets, as lead arranger and sole bookrunner, and the lenders party thereto (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 24, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.20
 
 
First Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of August 8, 2006, by and among the
Registrant, the guarantors named thereto and Royal Bank of Canada (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on August 14, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.21
 
 
Senior Unsecured Bridge Loan Agreement, dated December 18, 2006, by and among the Registrant, Royal
Bank of Canada, as administrative agent, RBC Capital Markets Corporation, as exclusive lead arranger
and sole bookrunner, and the guarantors and institutional lenders named thereto (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 19, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.22
 
 
Strategic Agreement dated July 1, 2003 between Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina and DLS
Argentina Limited Sucursal Argentina (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on December 29, 2006).




-36-



Table of Contents





 
 
 
 
 


Exhibit
 
Description




 
 
 
 
 


 
10.23
 
 
Amendment No. 1 dated May 18, 2005 to Strategic Agreement between Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal
Argentina and DLS Argentina Limited Sucursal Argentina (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to
the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on December 29, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.24
 
 
Amendment No. 2 dated January 1, 2006 between Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina and DLS
Argentina Limited Sucursal Argentina (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on December 29, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.25
 
 
Investor Rights Agreement, dated December 18, 2006, by and between the Registrant and Oil & Gas Rental
Services, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed on December 19, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.26
 
 
Investors Rights Agreement dated as of August 18, 2006 by and among the Registrant and the investors
named on Exhibit A thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K
filed on August 14, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.27*
 
 
2003 Incentive Stock Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.12 to the Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed August 17, 2005).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.28*
 
 
Form of Option Certificate issued pursuant to 2003 Incentive Stock Plan (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.41 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2003).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.29*
 
 
2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on
September 18, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.30*
 
 
Form of Employee Restricted Stock Agreement pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on September 18, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.31*
 
 
Form of Employee Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on September 18, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.32*
 
 
Form of Employee Incentive Stock Option Agreement pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on September 18, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.33
 
 
Form of Non-Employee Director Restricted Stock Agreement pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive
Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on September 18,
2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.34*
 
 
Form of Non-Employee Director Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on
September 18, 2006).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.35
 
 
Form of Performance Award Agreement pursuant to the Registrants’ 2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on November 6, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.36
 
 
Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of April 26, 2007, by and among the Registrant,
as borrower, Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent and collateral agent, RBC Capital Markets,
as lead arranger and sole bookrunner, and the lenders party thereto (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on May 10, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.37
 
 
First Amendment to Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of December 3, 2007, by and
among the Registrant, the guarantors named thereto, Royal Bank of Canada and the lenders named thereto
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on December 6, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.38
 
 
Amended and Restated Guaranty, dated April 26, 2007, by each of the guarantors named thereto in favor
of Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent and collateral agent (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on May 10, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.39
 
 
Amended and Restated Pledge and Security Agreement, dated April 26, 2007, by the Registrant in favor of
Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent and collateral agent (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on May 10, 2007).




-37-



Table of Contents





 
 
 
 
 


Exhibit
 
Description




 
 
 
 
 


 
10.40
 
 
Credit Agreement, dated January 31, 2008, among the Registrant, as lender, BCH Ltd., as borrower, and
BCH Energy do Brasil Servicos de Petroleo Ltda., as guarantor (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on February 6, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.41
 
 
Option to Purchase and Governance Agreement, dated January 31, 2008, among the Registrant, BrazAlta
Resources Corp. and BCH Ltd. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K
filed on February 6, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.42
 
 
Subordination Agreement, dated January 31, 2008, among the Registrant, Standard Bank PLC, BCH Ltd., BCH
Energy do Brasil Servicos de Petroleo Ltda. and BrazAlta Resources Corp. (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on February 6, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.43
 
 
Form of Convertible Subordinated Secured
Debenture (incorporated by reference to Schedule E to Exhibit
10.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on February 6, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
10.44
 
 
Agreement, dated April 1, 2007, by and between the Registrant and David Wilde (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the Registrant’s Form 8-K filed on April 3, 2007).


 
 
 
 
 


 
21.1
 
 
Subsidiaries of Registrant (filed as Exhibit 21.1 to the Registrant’s Form 10-K filed on March 7, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
23.1
 
 
Consent of UHY LLP (filed as Exhibit 23.1 to the Registrant’s Form 10-K filed on March 7, 2008).


 
 
 
 
 


 
31.1
 
 
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.


 
 
 
 
 


 
31.2
 
 
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.


 
 
 
 
 


 
32.1
 
 
Certification of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 1350, as
adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.





 








*
 
Compensation Plan or Agreement


-38-






EX-31.1
2
h56222a1exv31w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w1



 

EXHIBIT 31.1

CERTIFICATION BY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-14(a) AND 15d-14(a) UNDER THE EXCHANGE ACT

I, Munawar Hidayatallah, certify that:

     1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K/A of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. for the
year ended December 31, 2007;

     2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;

     3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included
in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;

     4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:

          (a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to
the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;

          (b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control
over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;

          (c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;

          (d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial
reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth
fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and

     5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit
committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):

          (a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of
internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and

          (b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.

Date: April 29, 2008



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 
By:  
 /s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah
 
 

 
 
Munawar H. Hidayatallah 
 

 
 
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman 
 


 






EX-31.2
3
h56222a1exv31w2.htm
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w2



 



 
 
 
 
 


EXHIBIT 31.2

CERTIFICATION BY CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-14(a) AND 15d-14(a) UNDER THE EXCHANGE ACT

I, Victor M. Perez, certify that:

     1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K/A of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. for the
year ended December 31, 2007;

     2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;

     3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included
in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;

     4. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:

(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls
and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information
relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us
by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is
being prepared;

(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal
control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles;

(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures
and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure
controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation;

(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the
registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control
over financial reporting; and

     5. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit
committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):




 
(a)
 
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and
report financial information; and


 

 
(b)
 
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.



Date:
April 29, 2008



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 
By  
 /s/ Victor M. Perez
 
 

 
 
Victor M. Perez 
 

 
 
Chief Financial Officer 
 


 






EX-32.1
4
h56222a1exv32w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO SECTION 906



exv32w1



 



 
 
 
 
 


EXHIBIT 32.1

CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002

In connection with this Annual Report on Form 10-K/A of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. (the “Company”)
for the period ended December 31, 2007, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the
date hereof (the “Report”), the undersigned hereby certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350,
that:

(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934; and

(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the
financial condition and results of the operations of the Company.

Date: April 29, 2008



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 
By:  
/s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah
 
 

 
 
Munawar H. Hidayatallah 
 

 
 
Chief Executive Officer 
 


 


Date: April 29, 2008



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 
By:  
/s/ Victor M. Perez
 
 

 
 
Victor M. Perez 
 

 
 
Chief Financial Officer 
 


 


 






-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
