begin privacy enhanced message proc type 2001,mic clear originator name webmaster www.sec.gov originator key asymmetric mfgwcgyevqgbaqicaf8dsgawrwjaw2snkk9avtbzyzmr6agjlwyk3xmzv3dtinen twsm7vrzladbmyqaionwg5sdw3p6oam5d3tdezxmm7z1t b twidaqab mic info rsa md5,rsa, immfdpscpshc3cvs000ctfq4osumwhnlotkk19hknc5rykuioc2eaqej0 rrdroa sv6yol0tc9 d6nreunqg5q 0001021408 99 000543.txt 19990325 0001021408 99 000543.hdr.sgml 19990325 accession number 0001021408 99 000543 conformed submission type 10 k405 public document count 9 conformed period of report 19981231 filed as of date 19990324 filer company data company conformed name bethlehem steel corp de central index key 0000011860 standard industrial classification steel works, blast furnaces rolling mills coke ovens 3312 irs number 240526133 state of incorporation de fiscal year end 1231 filing values form type 10 k405 sec act sec file number 001 01941 film number 99571629 business address street 1 1170 eighth ave city bethlehem state pa zip 18016 7699 business phone 6106942424 mail address street 1 1170 eighth ave city bethlehem state pa zip 18016 7699 10 k405 1 form 10 k405 1998 securities and exchange commission washington, d. c. 20549 form 10 k mark one x annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1998 transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 commission file number 1 1941 bethlehem steel corporation exact name of registrant as specified in its charter delaware 24 0526133 state of incorporation i.r.s. employer identification no. 1170 eighth avenue bethlehem, pennsylvania 18016 7699 address of principal executive zip code offices registrant's telephone number, including area code 610 694 2424 securities registered pursuant to section 12 b of the act title of each class name of each exchange on which registered common stock 1 par value per new york stock exchange share chicago stock exchange preference stock purchase rights new york stock exchange chicago stock exchange preferred stock 1 par value per share 5.00 cumulative convertible new york stock exchange stated value 50.00 per share 2.50 cumulative convertible new york stock exchange stated value 25.00 per share 8 3 8 debentures. due march 1, 2001 new york stock exchange 8.45 debentures. due march 1, 2005 new york stock exchange securities registered pursuant to section 12 g of the act none indicate by check mark whether the registrant 1 has filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15 d of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports , and 2 has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes x no indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10 k or any amendment to this form 10 k. x aggregate market value of voting stock held by non affiliates 1,157,741,902 the amount shown is based on the closing price of bethlehem common stock on the new york stock exchange composite tape on march 15, 1999. voting stock held by directors and executive officers of bethlehem is not included in the computation. however, bethlehem has made no determination that such individuals are affiliates within the meaning of rule 405 under the securities act of 1933. number of shares of common stock outstanding as of march 15, 1999 130,370,007 documents incorporated by reference selected portions of the 1998 annual report to stockholders of bethlehem steel corporation are incorporated by reference into part i and part ii of this report on form 10 k. selected portions of the 1999 proxy statement of bethlehem steel corporation are incorporated by reference into part iii of this report on form 10 k. part i item 1. business. bethlehem 1 manufactures and sells a wide variety of steel mill products and produces and sells coke and iron ore. the following table shows the percentage of net sales by major classes of product 1998 1997 1996 steel mill products hot rolled sheets 13.3 14.9 14.3 cold rolled sheets 16.8 17.2 16.2 coated sheets 28.6 31.5 32.3 tin mill products 6.7 7.4 6.9 plates 22.3 15.2 15.3 rail products 4.4 4.3 3.5 structural shapes and pilings 1.3 3.8 other steel mill products 4.5 3.2 1.6 other products and services including raw materials  3.4 5.0 6.1 100.0 100.0 100.0 operations bethlehem produces a wide variety of steel mill products including hot rolled, cold rolled and coated sheets, tin mill products, carbon and alloy plates, rail, specialty blooms, carbon and alloy bars and large diameter pipe. bethlehem's operations include the burns harbor division, the sparrows point division, bethlehem lukens plate and pennsylvania steel technologies, inc. bethlehem also has iron ore operations which provide raw materials to bethlehem's steelmaking facilities or sell such materials to trade customers , railroad and trucking operations which primarily transport raw materials and semifinished steel products within various bethlehem operations and lake shipping operations which primarily transport raw materials to the burns harbor division . see item 2. properties of this report for a description of the facilities of these business units and operations. 1 bethlehem when used in this report means bethlehem steel corporation, a delaware corporation, and where applicable includes its consolidated subsidiaries. bethlehem was incorporated in delaware in 1919. 1 the following table shows production information for bethlehem and for the domestic steel industry. the information regarding the domestic steel industry is based on data from the american iron and steel institute aisi 1998 1997 1996 domestic steel industry raw steel production capability million of net tons  125.3 121.4 116.0 domestic steel industry raw steel production million of net tons  107.6 108.6 105.3 domestic steel industry average raw steel utilization rate 86 89 91 bethlehem's raw steel production capability million of net tons  10.9 10.5 10.5 bethlehem's raw steel production million of net tons  10.2 9.6 9.4 bethlehem's average raw steel utilization rate 93 91 90 bethlehem's production as a percent of the domestic steel industry 9.5 8.9 9.1 preliminary of bethlehem's 1998 raw steel production, 88 percent was produced by basic oxygen furnaces and 12 percent by electric furnaces. bethlehem's operations are subject to planned and unplanned outages due to required maintenance, equipment malfunctions, work stoppages, various hazards including explosions, fires and severe weather conditions and the availability of raw materials, supplies, utilities and other items needed for the production of steel. these outages could result in reduced production and increased costs. markets the following table shows the percentage of the total net tons of steel mill products shipped by bethlehem to each of its principal markets, including shipments to its own manufacturing operations 1998 1997 1996 service centers, processors and converters including semifinished  46.9 46.9 45.2 transportation including automotive  23.0 24.9 26.0 construction 12.1 11.0 12.6 containers 5.2 5.8 5.2 machinery 4.9 4.7 5.1 other 7.9 6.7 5.9 100.0 100.0 100.0 many of the markets bethlehem supplies, such as automotive, machinery and construction, are highly cyclical and subject to downturns in the u.s. economy. also, many of bethlehem's customers and suppliers are subject to collective bargaining agreements, and their ability to operate could be impacted by a strike or work stoppage. bethlehem distributes steel products principally through its own sales organization, which has sales offices at various locations in the united states and mexico, and through foreign sales agents. in addition to selling to customers who consume steel products directly, bethlehem sells steel products to steel service centers, distributors, processors and converters. export sales were 4 percent of total sales in 1998, 2 percent in 1997 and 3 percent in 1996. 2 trade orders on hand were about 900 million at december 31, 1998, and 1.2 billion at december 31, 1997. substantially all of the orders on hand at december 31, 1998, are expected to be filled in 1999. steel price sensitivity bethlehem's financial results are significantly affected by relatively small on a percentage basis variations in the realized prices for its products. for example, bethlehem shipped 8.7 million net tons of steel products and recorded net sales of 4.5 billion during 1998, implying an average realized price per ton of about 516. a one percent increase or decrease in this implied average realized price during 1998 would, on a pro forma basis, have resulted in an increase or decrease in net sales and pre tax income of about 45 million. competitive pressures in the steel industry are severe. these pressures could limit bethlehem's ability to obtain price increases or could lead to a decline in prices, which could have a material adverse effect upon bethlehem. competition the domestic steel industry is highly competitive. this competition affects the prices that bethlehem can charge for its products, the utilization of its production facilities, its ability to sell higher value products and ultimately its profitability. capacity. there is excess world capacity for many of the products produced by bethlehem. moreover, some foreign steel producers are owned, controlled or subsidized by foreign governments. decisions by these foreign producers to continue marginal facilities may be influenced to a greater degree by political and economic policy considerations than by prevailing market conditions. in addition, overcapacity has been perpetuated by the continued operation, modernization and upgrading of marginal domestic facilities through bankruptcy reorganization proceedings and by the sale of marginal domestic facilities to new owners, which operate such facilities with a lower cost structure. over the next several years, construction of additional flat rolled production facilities could result in increased domestic capability of 6 million tons over 1998 levels. electric furnace producers. domestic integrated producers, such as bethlehem, have lost market share in recent years to domestic electric furnace producers. these companies are relatively efficient, low cost producers that make steel from scrap in electric furnaces which are less expensive to build than integrated facilities , have lower employment and environmental costs per ton shipped and target regional markets. through the use of various higher quality raw materials and thin slab casting technology, electric furnace producers are increasingly able to compete directly with producers of higher value products, including cold rolled and coated sheets. imports. domestic steel producers also face significant competition from foreign producers and have been, and may continue to be, adversely affected by unfairly traded imports. in certain cases, foreign producers may be pricing their products below their production costs. imports of finished steel products accounted for about 26 percent of the domestic market in 1998, 18 percent in 1997 and 17 percent in 1996. the following table, which is based on data reported by the aisi, shows the percentage of the domestic apparent consumption of steel mill products supplied by imports for various classes of products. 1998 1997 1996 rail 31 26 26 plates 29 21 26 tin mill products 16 15 14 hot rolled and cold rolled sheets 31 22 19 coated sheets 10 11 10 all products  30 24 23 preliminary excludes steel imported in the form of manufactured goods, such as automobiles, but includes semifinished steel. 3 excluding semifinished steel, imports of steel mill products were about 34.6 million tons in 1998, 24.8 million tons in 1997 and 21.6 million tons in 1996. antidumping and countervailing duty orders covering imports of corrosion resistant sheet from six countries, cold rolled sheet from three countries and plates from 11 countries, which resulted from unfair trade cases filed by bethlehem and 11 other companies in 1992, remain in place. suspension agreements are also in place limiting the volume of cut to length plate from russia, the ukraine and the people's republic of china and setting a price floor for south africa for a five year period from 1998. in february 1999, the commerce department announced substantial preliminary antidumping margins covering hot rolled sheet from japan, brazil and russia and also announced its intention to enter into i a suspension agreement limiting the volume of hot rolled sheet from russia for five years, and ii a comprehensive agreement to limit the volume of other steel products from russia to essentially 1997 levels. also in february 1999, bethlehem and four other producers filed new antidumping and countervailing duty petitions covering cut to length plate from japan, korea, india, indonesia, france, italy, the czech republic and macedonia. for further information on trade related matters, see international steel trade under the chairman's letter in bethlehem's 1998 annual report to stockholders. the major restructuring of the domestic steel industry, which began in the late 1970s and early 1980s, has removed the steelmaking capacity that once existed to meet market demand during peak periods. during the last few years, domestic producers have met a portion of the demand that exceeded steelmaking capacity by importing semifinished slabs for rolling into finished products in their own mills. substitute materials. for many steel products, there is substantial competition from manufacturers of products other than steel, including aluminum, ceramics, concrete, glass, plastic and wood. changes to the relative competitiveness of these substitute materials and the emergence of additional substitute materials could adversely affect future prices and demand for bethlehem's products. capital expenditures capital expenditures were 328 million in 1998 excluding the acquisition of lukens inc. compared with 228 million in 1997 and 259 million in 1996. capital expenditures for 1999 are currently estimated to be about 450 million. during 1998, bethlehem started construction of sparrows point's new continuous cold rolling mill complex. this 300 million complex, which is scheduled to begin production early in 2000, is expected to lower costs, improve quality and enhance capabilities. about 256 million of capital expenditures were authorized in 1998. at december 31, 1998, the estimated cost of completing authorized capital expenditures was about 640 million compared with 750 million at december 31, 1997. bethlehem expects to complete these authorized capital expenditures during 1999 to 2001. the domestic integrated steel industry is very capital intensive. as discussed under item 2. properties general of this report, bethlehem's principal operations and facilities are of varying ages, technologies and operating efficiencies. bethlehem will need to continue to make significant capital expenditures in the future to maintain and improve the competitiveness of its operations and facilities. environment bethlehem is subject to various federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations concerning, among other things, air emissions, waste water discharges and solid and hazardous waste disposal. during the five years ended december 31, 1998, bethlehem spent about 136 million for environmental control equipment. expenditures for new environmental control equipment totaled about 13 million in 1998, 15 million in 1997 and 29 million in 1996. the costs incurred in 1998 to operate and maintain existing environmental control equipment were about 114 million excluding interest costs but including depreciation charges of 14 million compared with 112 million in 1997 and 115 million in 1996. in addition, bethlehem has been required to pay 4 various fines and penalties relating to violations or alleged violations of laws and regulations in the environmental control area. bethlehem paid about 910,000 in 1998, 830,000 in 1997 and 160,000 in 1996 for such fines and penalties. under the clean air act, as amended, coke making facilities will have to meet progressively more stringent standards over the next 25 years. bethlehem currently operates coke making facilities in burns harbor, indiana and lackawanna, new york. operations at the coke division in bethlehem, pennsylvania were discontinued in march, 1998. bethlehem will continue to evaluate the impact of future emission control regulations on its burns harbor and lackawanna operations but believes that these operations will be able to comply. bethlehem and federal and state regulatory agencies conduct negotiations to resolve differences in interpretation of environmental control requirements. in some instances, those negotiations are held in connection with the resolution of pending environmental proceedings. bethlehem believes there will not be any significant curtailment or interruptions of any of its important operations as a result of these proceedings and negotiations. bethlehem cannot predict the future specific environmental control requirements. based on existing and anticipated regulations under current legislation, bethlehem estimates that capital expenditures for new environmental control equipment will average about 10 million per year over the next two years. however, estimates of future capital expenditures and operating costs required for environmental compliance are subject to numerous uncertainties, including the evolving nature of regulations, possible imposition of more stringent requirements, availability of new technologies and the timing of expenditures. under the resource conservation and recovery act, as amended rcra , the owners of certain facilities that managed hazardous waste after 1980 are required to investigate and, if appropriate, remediate certain historic environmental contamination found at the facility. all of bethlehem's major facilities may be subject to this corrective action program , and bethlehem has implemented or is currently implementing this program at its facilities located in steelton, pennsylvania lackawanna, new york burns harbor, indiana and sparrows point, maryland. at steelton, bethlehem completed a rcra facility investigation rfi , a corrective measures study cms and a remediation program approved by the united states environmental protection agency the epa and completed the remediation in 1994. at lackawanna, bethlehem is conducting an rfi which is expected to be completed later this year. at burns harbor, bethlehem is conducting an rfi in accordance with an epa approved work plan that will require several years to complete. at sparrows point, bethlehem, the epa and the maryland department of the environment have agreed to a phased rfi as part of a comprehensive multimedia pollution prevention agreement which was entered by the u. s. district court for maryland on october 8, 1997. the potential costs for possible remediation activities, if any, at lackawanna, burns harbor and sparrows point and the timeframe for implementation of these activities cannot be reasonably estimated until the rfis, and possibly the cmss, have been completed and approved. at its former plant in bethlehem, pennsylvania, bethlehem is conducting remedial investigations pursuant to the pennsylvania land recycling brownfields program in conjunction with comprehensive redevelopment plans. these investigations are being performed with input and oversight from both the pennsylvania department of environmental protection and the epa region iii corrective action staff to ensure that the actions taken are acceptable to both state and federal regulatory authorities. bethlehem does not believe that the operations it acquired as part of the lukens merger in 1998 are subject to the rcra corrective action program and, therefore, any remediation associated with those facilities will be addressed as appropriate in the ongoing course of business. bethlehem may have some residual liability for remediation associated with historic lukens facilities or those that have been sold or shut down since the merger, but any such liabilities are not anticipated to be material. for example, the electric arc furnace flue dust disposal site at the coatesville, pennsylvania, facility that was discussed by lukens in its 1997 form 10 k is continuing to be investigated by bethlehem for remediation pursuant to the pennsylvania brownfields program. bethlehem does not have any information at this time suggesting that the 3 million liability that had been recognized by lukens for that site is not appropriate. 5 under the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980, as amended cercla , also known as superfund , the epa can impose liability for site remediation on generators and transporters of waste, as well as past and present owners and operators of the sites where the waste was disposed of, regardless of fault or the legality of the disposal activities. bethlehem is actively involved at 26 sites where it has been advised that it may be considered a potentially responsible party under cercla or corresponding state superfund legislation. based on its experience regarding site remediation and its knowledge of and extent of involvement in such sites, bethlehem expects that its share of the costs for remediation of these sites will not be material. in its 1997 form 10 k, lukens discussed two cercla sites in which it was involved. subsequent to that discussion, the helen kramer site settlement was consummated and lukens paid its settlement amount of approximately 5.6 million before the merger of bethlehem and lukens. with regard to the douglassville site, lukens and bethlehem were identified as separate de minimis potentially responsible parties and are signatories to a consent decree which has been lodged with, but not yet entered by, the u.s. district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania. within 60 days following entry of the consent decree, payment of approximately 204,000 on behalf of lukens and 125,000 on behalf of bethlehem will be made in full resolution of those liabilities. although it is possible that bethlehem's future quarterly or annual results of operations could be materially affected by the future costs of environmental compliance, bethlehem believes that the future costs of environmental compliance will not have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial position or on its competitive position with respect to other integrated domestic steelmakers that are subject to the same environmental requirements. to the extent that competitors are not required to undertake equivalent costs, bethlehem's competitive position could be adversely affected. purchased materials and services bethlehem purchases about 3 billion per year of raw materials, energy, equipment, goods and services from commercial sources in about 40 countries. bethlehem's profitability could be affected by difficulties in obtaining these items and the prices paid for them. these difficulties could include such things as labor strikes, political instability and natural disasters. bethlehem made significant progress in 1998 through its strategic sourcing initiatives and expects further progress in 1999. see item 2. properties raw material properties and interests of this report for a further description of the sources of raw materials essential to bethlehem's steelmaking business. technology research and development. bethlehem performs research to improve existing products, develop new products and make operating processes more efficient. during 1998, 1997 and 1996, bethlehem spent about 23 million, 22 million and 25 million, respectively, for research and development. bethlehem owns a number of u.s. and foreign patents that relate to a wide variety of products and processes, has pending patent applications and is licensed under a number of patents. during 1998, 11 u.s. patents covering a variety of new developments were awarded to bethlehem. however, bethlehem believes that no single patent or license or group of patents or licenses is of material importance to its overall business. bethlehem also owns registered trademarks for certain of its products and service marks for certain of its services which, unlike patents and licenses, are renewable so long as they are continued in use and properly protected. year 2000 computer issue. problems created by the once common programming practice of storing date information using only the last two digits to indicate the year will impact all businesses and government organizations as we approach the year 2000. the scope of bethlehem's year 2000 program includes both information technology and non information technology systems, such as business and manufacturing computer systems, personal computers, technical infrastructure and facilities as well as the year 2000 readiness of key suppliers, agents, service providers and customers. 6 bethlehem has been actively working on resolving its year 2000 problem for over four years. the effort was initiated with a pilot project in late 1994 during which 5 percent of bethlehem's business applications were converted to be year 2000 compliant. the pilot project allowed bethlehem to develop a methodology for solving its year 2000 problem as well as a structure for effective management and timely correction of the problem within its systems. the major elements of the program are inventory, risk assessment, remediation, testing and contingency planning. in late 1997, bethlehem conducted a 45 day test of the operability and inter operability of all converted business applications for business unit and corporate systems as well as all operating system software in a full simulation of the year 2000. bethlehem reset the system clock for various dates and tested the processing of date information before and after december 31, 1999, as well as the processing of the year 2000 as a leap year. this test was completed successfully and validated bethlehem's processes and methods for addressing its year 2000 problem. two additional full scale tests were conducted in december 1998 and january 1999 to test applications not evaluated during the 1997 test and the main frame applications acquired in bethlehem's merger with lukens. the results of these additional tests were positive and reinforced the approach for addressing the year 2000 problem. bethlehem has completed the inventory and risk assessment for year 2000 components in all areas of its business. the risk assessment showed that less than 15 percent of bethlehem's computer components needed to be fixed or replaced. remediation and testing of business systems and technical infrastructure are complete except for a few planned replacement systems and upgrades. for manufacturing and environmental e.g., hvac, security, etc. operations, bethlehem has completed or scheduled all remediation activities. a few replacement systems are planned. in the end user computing area, bethlehem has installed hardware patches and standard software upgrades to most systems where necessary. bethlehem is currently focusing on other personal computer software and user written applications, spreadsheets and other end user files. bethlehem is over 95 percent complete with the entire remediation effort. remaining remediation and testing will continue throughout the first half of 1999. bethlehem continues to evaluate the readiness of its key suppliers and customers. starting in april 1998, bethlehem surveyed key suppliers, outside processors, warehousers and electronic data interchange trading partners. to date, responses have been received from 650 suppliers. bethlehem has sent follow up letters asking those suppliers who indicated compliance by the end of 1998 54 percent to confirm their compliance. additionally, bethlehem has received correspondence from over 500 key customers regarding their year 2000 readiness and it will continue to review their readiness during the next two quarters. during 1999, bethlehem will continue to develop year 2000 contingency plans for all areas of its business. bethlehem's contingency plans will address both internal staffing, computer systems and inventory and external suppliers, service providers, agents and customers risks. bethlehem's strategies for eliminating internal risk include the development of staffing plans for the year 2000 roll over, backup and or alternate procedures and inventory levels based on anticipated customer and supplier assessments. one of bethlehem's strategies for reducing external risk is to develop alternate plans for significant areas of its business where a vendor may not be year 2000 compliant. bethlehem's target is to develop, during the first half of 1999, contingency plans for critical business processes. the costs associated with bethlehem's year 2000 program continue to be at planned levels. the total estimated incremental cost of this activity is approximately 7 million. the cost will continue to be charged to normal operating expenses. bethlehem does not expect to incur any extraordinary charges associated with the effort and no major information service projects have been deferred because of its year 2000 program. bethlehem believes that it is taking all reasonable steps to ensure year 2000 readiness. bethlehem's ability to meet its projected goals depends, to an extent, on the year 2000 readiness of its key suppliers and customers, the completion of its final remediation and testing efforts and the successful development and implementation of contingency plans. these and other unanticipated year 2000 issues could have a material adverse effect on bethlehem's results of operations or financial condition. 7 employment at the end of 1998, bethlehem had about 17,000 employees, three quarters of whom are covered by agreements with the united steelworkers of america uswa . two agreements covering most of bethlehem's uswa represented employees expire in 1999. a strike or work stoppage could impact bethlehem's ability to operate if it is unable to negotiate new agreements with its represented employees when the existing agreements expire. also, bethlehem's profitability could be adversely affected if increased costs associated with any future contract are not recoverable through productivity improvements or price increases. for further information on bethlehem's employment related matters, see employment under financial review and operating analysis in bethlehem's 1998 annual report to stockholders. employee postretirement obligations at december 31, 1998, bethlehem had recorded a liability of 415 million for pensions. for further discussion of bethlehem's pension funding and obligations, see liquidity and capital structure under financial review and operating analysis in bethlehem's 1998 annual report to stockholders. bethlehem provides health care and life insurance benefits to most retirees and their dependents. most of these future benefits have not been funded and, therefore, bethlehem has substantial financial obligations on its balance sheet. at december 31, 1998, bethlehem had recorded a liability of 1,790 million for postretirement benefits other than pensions. to the extent competitors do not have similar obligations, bethlehem could be placed at a competitive disadvantage. also, increases in health care costs could adversely affect bethlehem's profitability. joint ventures, partnerships, facility sharing arrangements and mergers bethlehem has considered, and discussed with others, various opportunities for joint ventures, partnerships, facility sharing arrangements and mergers of all or part of bethlehem. bethlehem will continue to explore such opportunities. see item 2. properties. of this report for a description of joint ventures in which bethlehem participates. merger with lukens inc. bethlehem acquired lukens inc. in a merger transaction which closed during the second quarter of 1998. for further information regarding the merger, see financial review and operating analysis in bethlehem's 1998 annual report to stockholders. businesses exited in recent years, bethlehem has shut down or sold several facilities and operations. since 1996, bethlehem recorded net charges of 365 million in connection with these actions. during the fourth quarter of 1998, bethlehem closed sparrows point's 160 inch plate mill and increased the output at existing underutilized facilities at burns harbor, coatesville and conshohocken. bethlehem recorded a charge of 35 million 29 million after tax during the second quarter of 1998 to write off the book value of equipment to be dismantled and to recognize employee benefit related costs. bethlehem also sold certain stainless assets to allegheny teledyne incorporated and announced the closing of the former lukens operations in massillon, ohio, and washington, pennsylvania. during the first quarter of 1999, bethlehem sold washington specialty metals corporation, lukens' former distribution business, to ryerson tull for 70 million. if it becomes necessary for bethlehem to exit or reduce employment at additional businesses and operations in the future, it could incur substantial additional charges in the process. the charges for employees terminated as a result of facility shutdowns or sales vary depending upon the demographics of the workforce but could be 100,000 per employee. the recording of these charges could have a material adverse impact on bethlehem's financial condition because of the increase in recorded liabilities, decrease in stockholders' equity and possible increases in required contributions to the pension fund and retiree health care payments. except as discussed above or previously announced, bethlehem does not currently anticipate any additional facility shutdowns or other reasons why active bethlehem employees might be terminated. 8 capital structure bethlehem's capital structure is highly leveraged. although bethlehem believes it has sufficient access to funds for the operation of its business, its existing obligations and below investment grade credit ratings may limit its ability to raise capital at reasonable cost and terms in the future. forward looking statements bethlehem and its representatives may from time to time make forward looking statements in reports filed with the securities and exchange commission, reports to stockholders, press releases, other written documents and oral presentations. these forward looking statements may include, among others, statements concerning projected levels of sales, shipments and income, pricing trends, cost reduction strategies, product mix, anticipated capital expenditures and other future plans and strategies. as permitted by the safe harbor provisions of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995, bethlehem is identifying in this report important factors that could cause bethlehem's actual results to differ materially from those projected in these forward looking statements. these factors include, but are not necessarily limited to . the effect of planned and unplanned outages on bethlehem's operations . the potential impact of strikes or work stoppages at facilities of bethlehem's customers and suppliers . the sensitivity of bethlehem's results to relatively small changes in the prices obtained by bethlehem for its products . intense competition due to world steel overcapacity, new domestic capacity over the next several years, low cost electric furnace facilities, imports especially unfairly traded imports and substitute materials . the high capital requirements associated with integrated steel facilities . the significant costs associated with environmental controls and remediation expenditures and the uncertainty of future environmental control requirements . availability and prices associated with raw materials, supplies, utilities and other services and items required by bethlehem's operations . employment matters, including costs and uncertainties associated with bethlehem's collective bargaining agreements, and employee postretirement obligations . the effect of possible future closure or exit of businesses . bethlehem's highly leveraged capital structure . the effect of bethlehem's customers and suppliers not becoming year 2000 compliant in a timely manner, the effect of bethlehem not completing its final remediation and testing efforts and the effect of bethlehem not successfully developing and implementing contingency plans and . the effect of existing and possible future lawsuits filed against bethlehem. item 1. business and item 3. legal proceedings of this report discuss these factors in more detail and are incorporated by reference into this section. bethlehem does not undertake to update any forward looking statements that may be made from time to time by bethlehem or its representatives. item 2. properties. burns harbor division location in indiana, on lake michigan, about 50 miles southeast of chicago, illinois. principal products and markets hot rolled sheet, cold rolled sheet and corrosion resistant coated sheet, coke and semifinished steel to bethlehem lukens plate. its principal markets include automotive, service centers, construction, machinery and appliance. 9 principal facilities a sintering plant, a coke oven battery burns harbor operates a second coke oven battery for the battery's owner , two blast furnaces, including coal injection facilities, three basic oxygen furnaces with a combined annual raw steel production capability of about 5.6 million tons, a vacuum degassing facility, two continuous slab casters with a combined annual production capability of about 4.0 million tons, an 80 inch hot strip mill, two continuous pickling lines, an 80 inch five stand cold reducing mill, sheet finishing mills, a continuous heat treating line, batch annealing facilities and a 72 inch hot dip galvanizing line. burns harbor operates a cold reducing mill, a continuous pickling line, a galvanizing line and two coke oven batteries in lackawanna, new york. burns harbor continuously casts about 80 percent of its total production volume, with the remaining 20 percent being ingot cast. ingot cast slabs are used primarily by bethlehem lukens plate to make steel plates. burns harbor's utilization of raw steel production capability was 94 percent during 1998. sparrows point division location on the chesapeake bay, near baltimore, maryland. principal products and markets hot rolled, cold rolled, hot dip galvanized and galvalume r sheet, tin mill products and semifinished steel to bethlehem lukens plate. its principal markets include construction, containers and service centers. principal facilities a sintering plant, a large blast furnace, two basic oxygen furnaces with an annual raw steel production capability of about 3.7 million tons, a two strand continuous slab caster, a 68 inch hot strip mill, three continuous pickling lines, three cold reducing mills 66 inch, 56 inch and 48 inch , continuous and batch annealing facilities, two galvanizing lines, a galvalume r line, a 48 inch hot dip galvanizing galvalume r line and tin mill facilities that include tin and chrome plating lines. sparrows point continuously casts essentially 100 percent of its total production volume. sparrows point's utilization of raw steel production capability was 99 percent during 1998. pennsylvania steel technologies, inc. pst location in steelton, pennsylvania, south of harrisburg, pennsylvania. principal products and markets railroad rails, specialty blooms and flat bars. it is one of only two rail producers in the united states. pst also produces large diameter pipe for the oil and gas industries. principal facilities a dc electric arc furnace with an annual raw steel production capability of about 1.1 million tons, a ladle furnace, a vacuum degassing facility, a continuous bloom caster, a 44 inch blooming mill, a 28 inch rail mill, in line rail head hardening facilities, finishing and shipping facilities for long length 80 foot rails, a 20 inch bar mill and an electric fusion welded pipe mill. pst's utilization of raw steel production capability was 67 percent during 1998. bethlehem lukens plate location in coatesville and conshohocken, pennsylvania burns harbor, indiana. principal products and markets carbon plate, high strength, low alloy plate, commercial alloy plate, military alloy plate, coiled and cut plate and clad plate. its principal markets include service centers, transportation, infrastructure, machinery, equipment, environmental and engineering. principal facilities coatesville an electric arc furnace with an annual raw steel production capability of about 900,000 tons, two plate mills 140 inch and 206 inch and heat treating facilities. conshohocken a 110 inch steckel mill, two reheat furnaces, a roughing mill, an on line cooling and cut to length line, a quench and temper line and a batch heat treating system. burns harbor a 50 x 90 inch slabbing mill, a 110 inch sheared 10 plate mill including two continuous reheat furnaces, a roughing mill, a finishing mill and a normalizing furnace, and a 160 inch sheared plate mill including two continuous reheat furnaces, four batch reheat furnaces, a roughing mill, a finishing mill, an in line accelerated cooling facility, a quench and temper line and a batch normalizing furnace. bethlehem lukens plates' utilization of raw steel production capability was 94 percent during the portion of 1998 that it was operated as a part of bethlehem. joint ventures bethlehem participates in the following joint ventures . double g coatings company, l.p. located near jackson, mississippi operates a 270,000 ton per year sheet coating line that produces galvanized and galvalume r coated sheets primarily for the construction market. sparrows point provides cold rolled coils for about half of double g's annual capability and is responsible for marketing its share of the finished product. . steel construction systems located in orlando, florida a joint venture with csr rinker, the largest building materials company in florida. steel construction systems manufactures residential and light commercial buildings. . walbridge coatings located in walbridge, ohio owns and operates a 400,000 ton per year electrogalvanizing line. this facility produces corrosion resistant sheet steel primarily for the automobile industry and other consumer durables markets. burns harbor provides cold rolled coils for 85 percent of walbridge's annual capability and is responsible for marketing its share of the finished product. . indiana pickling and processing company located in northern indiana operates a pickling line. . chicago cold rolling, l.l.c. located in northern indiana operates a reversing cold mill complex. . twb company located in michigan operates the largest plant in north america producing laser welded blanks for the automotive industry. bethlehem also has indirect equity interests in various iron ore properties. see raw material properties and interests below. raw material properties and interests iron ore. bethlehem has indirect equity interests in various iron ore operating properties, which excluding tonnages applicable to interests owned by others it estimates contained recoverable reserves at december 31, 1998, sufficient to produce at least 21 million tons of direct shipping iron ore from properties located in brazil and 191 million tons of iron ore pellets from properties located in minnesota. during 1997, bethlehem sold its equity interest in iron ore company of canada ioc . bethlehem continues as a customer of ioc and purchases iron ore at prices which approximate market. in addition to the estimated reserves at operating properties, bethlehem also has indirect equity interests in undeveloped or nonoperating iron ore properties, which excluding tonnages applicable to interests owned by others it estimates contained recoverable reserves at december 31, 1998, sufficient to produce at least 9 million tons of direct shipping iron ore from properties located in brazil and 128 million tons of iron ore pellets from properties located in minnesota. the iron ore operating properties in which bethlehem has interests have mining and processing facilities which can supply a majority of bethlehem's current annual iron ore requirements. the location of bethlehem's steel operations and the iron ore products best suited to these facilities determine when bethlehem sells, exchanges and purchases iron ore. these purchases have been from various sources, including sources in which it has ownership interests, under a variety of arrangements. 11 bethlehem's share of the annual iron ore production by enterprises in which it has ownership interests, for bethlehem's use or sale to trade customers, was 7.9 million tons in 1998 and 7.7 million tons in 1997. in addition to these sources, bethlehem purchased 5.1 million tons of iron ore in 1998 and 4.8 million tons of iron ore in 1997 from sources in which it had no ownership interests. in 1998, bethlehem obtained about 58 percent of its iron ore requirements from operations in which it had ownership interests compared with 61 percent in 1997. bethlehem had trade sales of iron ore of 0.3 million tons in 1998 and 1997. iron ore trade sales commitments for 1999 are 0.5 million tons and no sales commitments exist beyond 1999. the interests in foreign iron ore properties described above are subject to the risks associated with investments in foreign countries, including the risk of nationalization. coal and coke. bethlehem has sold all of its coal operating properties. bethlehem owns undeveloped or nonoperating coal properties in pennsylvania, which it estimates contained recoverable reserves at december 31, 1998, sufficient to produce at least 158 million tons of coal, of which about 91 percent and 9 percent, respectively, are metallurgical and steam coal. in 1997 and 1998, all of the coal used by bethlehem was purchased from commercial sources. through december 31, 2005, bethlehem is committed to satisfy certain of its coal requirements from a single supplier. bethlehem operates coke making facilities at burns harbor, indiana and lackawanna, new york. facilities in bethlehem, pennsylvania were discontinued in march, 1998. other raw materials. bethlehem purchases its other raw material requirements from commercial sources. transportation bethlehem owns seven subsidiary shortline railroads which transport raw materials and semifinished steel products within various bethlehem operations and serve other customers on their lines. bethlehem manages an interstate trucking company serving bethlehem's operations and other facilities and will manage a rail truck intermodal facility in bethlehem, pennsylvania. the burns harbor division operates two 1,000 foot ore vessels one owned and one under long term charter , which are used for the transportation of iron ore on the great lakes. general while bethlehem's principal operations and facilities are adequately maintained, they are of varying ages, technologies and operating efficiencies. bethlehem believes that most of its operations and facilities currently are competitive with the operations and facilities of its principal competitors. bethlehem will continue to make capital expenditures to improve and maintain the competitiveness of its operations and facilities. see item 1. business capital expenditures of this report for a discussion of bethlehem's capital expenditures. bethlehem owns all principal operations and facilities except for two continuous casters at sparrows point and burns harbor which are being leased and were capitalized. during 1998, bethlehem sold its no. 1 coke oven battery to an affiliate of dte energy services, inc., but bethlehem will continue to operate the facility for the new owner and purchase its output. bethlehem financed the construction of two hot dip galvanizing lines at its burns harbor and sparrows point divisions. these two galvanizing lines are pledged as collateral for the borrowings. 12 item 3. legal proceedings. bethlehem is a party to numerous legal proceedings incurred in the ordinary course of its business, including the matter specifically discussed below. on december 3, 1997, the indiana department of environmental management idem issued a notice alleging violations of indiana air pollution control regulations and operating permit conditions by bethlehem at the burns harbor division. the alleged violations involve visible emissions from the basic oxygen furnace roof monitor and iron beaching pits and failure to install baghouses at various emission points. settlement discussions intended to lead to an agreed order resolving the matter are being held between bethlehem and idem. if settlement discussions are unsuccessful, bethlehem believes it has meritorious defenses and will vigorously defend the action. see item 1. business environment of this report for a discussion of bethlehem's potential responsibilities for environmental cleanup at certain sites under rcra and cercla. bethlehem cannot predict with any certainty the outcome of any legal proceedings to which it is a party. however, in the opinion of bethlehem's management, adequate reserves have been recorded for losses which are likely to result from these proceedings. to the extent that such reserves prove to be inadequate, bethlehem would incur a charge to earnings which could be material to its future results of operations in particular quarterly or annual periods. the outcome of these proceedings, however, is not currently expected to have a material adverse effect on bethlehem's consolidated financial position. item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders. there were no matters submitted to a vote of security holders during the fourth quarter of 1998. 13 executive officers of the registrant. the executive officers of bethlehem as of march 15, 1999, are as follows name age position curtis h. barnette 64 chairman chief executive officer roger p. penny 62 president chief operating officer gary l. millenbruch 61 executive vice president chief financial officer and treasurer duane r. dunham 57 executive vice president commercial and business development and chief commercial officer dr. augustine e. moffitt, jr. 53 senior vice president administration and chief administrative officer lonnie a. arnett 53 vice president accounting and controller dr. walter n. bargeron 56 president, burns harbor division stephen g. donches 53 vice president public affairs andrew r. futchko 56 president, pennsylvania steel technologies, inc. william h. graham 53 vice president law , general counsel and secretary carl w. johnson 57 president, sparrows point division john l. kluttz 56 vice president union relations dr. carl f. meitzner 59 vice president planning van r. reiner 50 president, bethlehem lukens plate dr. malcolm j. roberts 56 vice president technology and chief technology officer robert a. rudzki 45 vice president purchasing and transportation and chief procurement officer dorothy l. stephenson 49 vice president human resources all of the executive officers have held responsible management or professional positions with bethlehem or its subsidiaries for more than the past five years. bethlehem's by laws provide that the board of directors annually chooses the officers and that each officer holds office until his or her successor is elected, or his or her death, resignation or removal. 14 part ii item 5. market for the registrant's common stock and related security holder matters. as of march 15, 1999, about 34,000 stockholders held 130,370,007 shares of bethlehem common stock. the principal market for bethlehem common stock is the new york stock exchange. bethlehem common stock is also listed on the chicago stock exchange. dividends on bethlehem common stock are paid quarterly when declared by bethlehem's board of directors. under the provisions of bethlehem's 10 3 8 senior notes due 2003, bethlehem's ability to pay dividends on its common stock is restricted. see note j to the consolidated financial statements. at december 31, 1998, about 520 million was available for the payment of common stock dividends under these provisions. bethlehem has not paid a dividend on its common stock since the fourth quarter of 1991. bethlehem's board of directors will determine whether to pay any future dividends subject to any applicable restrictions based on attained financial results and business outlook. the following table shows the high and low sales prices of bethlehem common stock as reported in the consolidated transaction reporting system. the closing sale price of bethlehem common stock on march 15, 1999, was 8.938. 1998 1997 period sales prices sales prices high low high low first quarter 15.500 8.063 9.375 7.625 second quarter 17.125 11.063 10.750 7.750 third quarter 13.438 7.000 12.938 9.813 fourth quarter 10.750 7.313 11.563 7.750 item 6. selected financial data. the information required by this item is incorporated by reference from page 31 of bethlehem's 1998 annual report to stockholders. item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. the information required by this item is incorporated by reference from pages 2 to 7 and 10 to 13 of bethlehem's 1998 annual report to stockholders. 