item 2. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations forward looking information statements in this report contain various forward looking statements within the meaning of section 27a of the securities act of 1933, as amended, and section 21e of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, which represent the company's expectations or beliefs concerning future events. when used in this document and in documents incorporated herein by reference, the words expects, plans, anticipates, indicates, believes, forecast, guidance, outlook, may, will, should, seeks, targets and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements. similarly, statements that describe the company s objectives, plans or goals, or actions the company may take in the future, are forward looking statements. forward looking statements include, without limitation, the company s expectations concerning operations and financial conditions, including changes in capacity, revenues, and costs future financing plans and needs the amounts of its unencumbered assets and other sources of liquidity fleet plans overall economic and industry conditions plans and objectives for future operations regulatory approvals and actions, including the company s applications for antitrust immunity with other oneworld alliance members and the impact on the company of its results of operations in recent years and the sufficiency of its financial resources to absorb that impact. other forward looking statements include statements which do not relate solely to historical facts, such as, without limitation, statements which discuss the possible future effects of current known trends or uncertainties, or which indicate that the future effects of known trends or uncertainties cannot be predicted, guaranteed or assured. all forward looking statements in this report are based upon information available to the company on the date of this report. the company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. guidance given in this report regarding capacity, fuel consumption, fuel prices, fuel hedging, and unit costs, and statements regarding expectations of regulatory approval of the company s applications for antitrust immunity with other oneworld members are forward looking statements. forward looking statements are subject to a number of factors that could cause the company s actual results to differ materially from the company s expectations. the following factors, in addition to other possible factors not listed, could cause the company s actual results to differ materially from those expressed in forward looking statements the materially weakened financial condition of the company, resulting from its significant losses in recent years very weak demand for air travel and lower investment asset returns resulting from the severe global economic downturn the company s need to raise substantial additional funds and its ability to do so on acceptable terms the ability of the company to generate additional revenues and reduce its costs continued high and volatile fuel prices and further increases in the price of fuel, and the availability of fuel the company s substantial indebtedness and other obligations the ability of the company to satisfy certain covenants and conditions in certain of its financing and other agreements changes in economic and other conditions beyond the company s control, and the volatile results of the company s operations the fiercely and increasingly competitive business environment faced by the company potential industry consolidation and alliance changes competition with reorganized carriers low fare levels by historical standards and the company s reduced pricing power changes in the company s corporate or business strategy extensive government regulation of the company s business conflicts overseas or terrorist attacks uncertainties with respect to the company s international operations outbreaks of a disease such as sars, avian flu or the h1n1 virus that affects travel behavior labor costs that are higher than those of the company s competitors uncertainties with respect to the company s relationships with unionized and other employee work groups increased insurance costs and potential reductions of available insurance coverage the company s ability to retain key management personnel potential failures or disruptions of the company s computer, communications or other technology systems losses and adverse publicity resulting from any accident involving the company s aircraft interruptions or disruptions in service at one or more of the company s primary market airports the heavy taxation of the airline industry changes in the price of the company s common stock and the ability of the company to reach acceptable agreements with third parties. additional information concerning these and other factors is contained in the company s securities and exchange commission filings, including but not limited to the company s 2009 form 10 k. overview the company recorded a net loss of 489 million in the first quarter of 2010 compared to a net loss of 366 million in the same period last year. the company s loss reflects a significant year over year increase in fuel prices from an average of 1.91 per gallon in the first quarter 2009 to an average of 2.22 per gallon in the first three months of 2010, including the effects of hedging. the price increase resulted in 187 million in incremental year over year fuel expense in the first quarter of 2010 based on the year over year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied by gallons consumed . further, in january 2010, the venezuelan government devalued its currency from 2.15 bolivars per u.s. dollar to 4.30 bolivars per u.s. dollar and the venezuelan economy was designated as highly inflationary. as a result, the company recognized a loss of 53 million related to the currency remeasurement in january 2010. the company does not expect any significant ongoing impact of the currency devaluation on its system wide operations. the company s unit costs excluding fuel and the venezuelan currency devaluation impact were greater for the quarter ended march 31, 2010 than for the same period in 2009, driven by headwinds related to capacity reductions, airport and facility cost increases, the timing of materials and repairs expenses and revenue related expenses. the significant rise in fuel price and the loss on venezuelan currency was partially offset by higher unit revenues passenger revenue per available seat mile . mainline passenger unit revenues increased 6.8 percent for the first quarter due to a 2.2 point load factor increase and a 3.7 percent increase in passenger yield passenger revenue per passenger mile compared to the same period in 2009. although load factor performance and passenger yield showed year over year improvement, passenger yield has not kept pace with the increase in fuel prices, or sufficiently offset the protracted recovery of the global economy and inflation. the company believes this is the result of a fragmented industry with numerous competitors, excess capacity and pricing transparency resulting from the use of the internet, and other factors. the company believes that its reduced pricing power could persist indefinitely. in late 2009, the company unveiled a new business plan flightplan 2020. flightplan 2020 is a strategic framework developed to secure the company s future by focusing on what will be required to succeed in the airline business over the next decade. it establishes the company s priorities and a clear path to better position the company to meet the challenges of the coming years. this plan for achieving sustained profitability has five tenets i invest wisely, ii earn customer loyalty, iii strengthen and defend our global network, iv be a good place for good people and v fly profitably. in reaction to the challenges of increased fuel prices and the protracted recovery of demand for air travel in the wake of the severe downturn in the global economy, the company has continued to work to implement and maintain several key strategic actions under flightplan 2020 designed to help it manage through these near term challenges while seeking to position itself for long term success, including the execution of its fleet renewal and replacement plan, initiatives to improve dependability and on time performance, and initiatives to strengthen its global network through applications for antitrust immunity with certain airlines as further described in the following paragraphs. in addition, the company recently announced the strengthening of its global network through enhanced frequent flyer cooperation with gol, brazil s largest airline, the addition of mexicana, mexico s largest international airline, to the oneworld alliance in late 2009, the announcement that s7 airlines, russia s largest airline, will join the oneworld alliance in late 2010, and the addition of kingfisher, india s leading domestic airline, to the oneworld alliance in 2011. in march 2010, the company announced various agreements for commercial collaboration in new york and boston with jetblue airways jetblue that are intended to benefit customers of both airlines. the agreements will provide customers with interline service in non overlapping markets and routes, which will offer them more choices and more convenient connections. the agreements will provide more connections for more passengers at john f. kennedy international airport jfk and boston to and from american s international destinations in europe, asia and south america. under the terms of one of the agreements, american intends to transfer eight slot pairs at ronald reagan national airport currently owned by american and one slot pair at white plains, new york currently owned by amr eagle to jetblue, and jetblue intends to transfer twelve slot pairs at jfk to american. certain portions of the cooperative agreements may be subject to regulatory review. in 2008, american entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing arrangements with british airways and iberia, providing for commercial cooperation on flights between north america and most countries in europe, pooling and sharing of certain revenues and costs, expanded codesharing, enhanced frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in other areas. in connection with the joint business agreement, american, british airways and iberia, along with finnair and royal jordanian, applied to the department of transportation dot for antitrust immunity ati for their planned cooperation. in 2008, the carriers also began providing information to the eu directorate general competition dg comp regarding the proposed business agreement. in september 2009, dg comp issued an so in which it preliminarily identified competition concerns on a number of routes where the carriers operate competing services. the carriers timely responded to the so under applicable eu procedures. in response to dg comp s competition concerns identified in the so, the carriers have offered to undertake certain commitments. those commitments include, among other obligations, an offer to lease up to four slot pairs at london heathrow for direct service on certain specified routes. the carriers could also be required to lease an additional two heathrow slot pairs and two jfk operational authorities if current competitive conditions change. the carriers will make these slots available for lease to non oneworld alliance airlines. in march 2010, the eu began seeking public comment on these proposed commitments. in february of 2010, dot tentatively granted the carriers application for ati subject to certain conditions including requirements that american and british airways lease a total of four takeoff and landing slot pairs at london heathrow to other carriers beginning in 2011, that specified provisions of the joint business agreement be amended, and that the carriers submit reports regarding progress towards the alliance s stated goals and the realization of public benefits. dot also established a procedure that allowed any interested party to submit comments on its tentative findings within 45 days of the grant of tentative approval. american reviewed the order granting tentative approval with the other applicant carriers, and responded to dot within the required 45 day comment period. a final decision on the application is expected after dot s review of responses received from american and other interested parties. implementation of the joint business agreement and the related arrangements is subject to conditions, including final approval from dot and clearance from the european commission ec , various other u.s. and foreign regulatory approvals, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and commercial arrangements, and other approvals. following satisfaction of those conditions, american expects to begin implementing the joint business agreement in the second half of 2010. no assurances can be given as to any arrangements that may ultimately be implemented or any benefits the company may derive from such arrangements. also in february 2010, american and japan airlines jal announced the decision to strengthen their relationship. the carriers, both members of the oneworld alliance, jointly applied to dot for ati on certain routes, and jointly notified the ministry of land infrastructure, transport and tourism of japan mlit of the proposed cooperation. the company believes this application will meet dot s pro consumer and pro competition criteria for granting ati. as a part of the application, american and jal entered into a joint business agreement which will enhance their scope of cooperation on routes between north america and asia, through adjustments to their respective networks, flight schedules, and other business activities. this, in turn, will allow both carriers to better complement each other s operations and to develop and offer competitive products and quality service to their customers. as a part of these commercial benefits, american determined that with ati and by participating in a joint business agreement with american, jal could realize approximately 100 million in annual incremental revenue. american has given jal a guarantee to that effect covering the first three years following implementation of the joint business agreement, subject to certain terms and conditions. the company and other oneworld members have also discussed various possible financing arrangements with jal. the company has agreed to negotiate in good faith towards a capital investment in jal by american, oneworld and a private investment firm in the future if invited by jal and the government of japan. to date, the government of japan has declined any such investment, and the company does not expect that any such investment will be made in the near term. any such investment would be on and subject to terms and conditions customary to such an arrangement. the company also expects that the amount of such a capital investment, if any, would not exceed 1.4 billion, with the contribution by american and other oneworld carriers not to exceed 300 million, and the remainder to be made by a private investment firm. implementation of the joint business agreement with jal is subject to u.s. and foreign regulatory authorization, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and commercial arrangements, and other approvals. no assurances can be given as to any arrangements that may ultimately be implemented or any benefits that the company may derive from such arrangements. the joint business agreement is subject to ati approval and certain other conditions. in march of 2010, the president signed into law comprehensive health care reform legislation under the patient protection and affordable care act hr 3590 and the health care education and affordability reconciliation act hr 4872 the acts . the acts contain provisions which could impact the company's accounting for retiree medical benefits in future periods. however, the extent of that impact, if any, cannot be determined until regulations are promulgated under the acts and additional interpretations of the acts become available. elements of the acts the impact of which are currently not determinable include the elimination of lifetime limits on retiree medical coverage. the company will continue to assess the accounting implications of the acts as related regulations and interpretations of the acts become available. based on the analysis to date of the provisions in the acts the impact of which are reasonably determinable, a re measurement of the company s retiree plan liabilities is not required at this time. in addition, the company may consider plan amendments in future periods that may have accounting implications. also in march 2010, the eu and the u.s. committed to the extension of the open skies air services agreement that provides airlines from the u.s. and eu member states open access to each other s markets, with freedom of pricing and unlimited rights to fly beyond the u.s. and any airport in the eu. the extension of this agreement reinforces the relationship between the eu and the u.s. and furthers the cause of aviation liberalization. the company s ability to become profitable and its ability to continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis will depend on a number of factors, many of which are largely beyond the company s control. certain risk factors that affect the company s business and financial results are discussed in the risk factors listed in item 1a in the 2009 form 10 k. in addition, most of the company s largest domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have filed for bankruptcy in the last several years and have used this process to significantly reduce contractual labor and other costs. in order to remain competitive and to improve its financial condition, the company must continue to take steps to generate additional revenues and to reduce its costs. although the company has a number of initiatives underway to address its cost and revenue challenges, some of these initiatives involve changes to the company s business which it may be unable to implement. it has become increasingly difficult to identify and implement significant revenue enhancement and cost savings initiatives. the adequacy and ultimate success of the company s initiatives to generate additional revenues and reduce costs cannot be assured. moreover, whether the company s initiatives will be adequate or successful depends in large measure on factors beyond its control, notably the overall industry environment, including passenger demand, yield and industry capacity growth, and fuel prices. it will be very difficult for the company to continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return to profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve substantially or if fuel prices were to persist at high levels for an extended period. liquidity and capital resources significant indebtedness and future financing the company remains heavily indebted and has significant obligations including substantial pension funding obligations , as described more fully under item 7, management s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the company s 2009 form 10 k. indebtedness is a significant risk to the company as discussed in the risk factors listed in item 1a in the 2009 form 10 k. during the last few years, the company raised substantial financing to fund capital commitments mainly for aircraft and ground properties , debt maturities, and employee pension obligations, and to bolster its liquidity. as of the date of this form 10 q, the company believes it has sufficient liquidity to fund its operations and obligations, including repayment of debt and capital leases, capital expenditures and other contractual obligations however there can be no assurances to that effect. to meet the company s commitments, to maintain sufficient liquidity and because the company has significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years, including commitments to purchase aircraft, as well as substantial pension funding obligations refer to contractual obligations in item 7, management s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the 2009 form 10 k , the company will need access to substantial additional funding. an inability to obtain necessary additional funding on acceptable terms would have a material adverse impact on the company and on its ability to sustain its operations. for the remainder of 2010, the company will be required to make approximately 659 million of principal payments on long term debt and approximately 41 million in principal payments on capital leases, and the company expects to spend approximately 1.3 billion on capital expenditures, including aircraft commitments. in addition, the global economic downturn, rising fuel prices, the possibility of being required to post reserves under credit card processing agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral on fuel hedging contracts and fund pension plan contributions, among other things, may in the future negatively impact the company s liquidity. the company s substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important consequences. for example, they i limit the company s ability to obtain additional funding for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, investments and general corporate purposes, and adversely affect the terms on which such funding could be obtained ii require the company to dedicate a substantial portion of its cash flow from operations to payments on its indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the funds available for other purposes iii make the company more vulnerable to economic downturns and catastrophic external events and iv limit the company s ability to withstand competitive pressures and reduce its flexibility in responding to changing business and economic conditions. the company s possible remaining financing sources primarily include i a very limited amount of additional secured aircraft debt or sale leaseback transactions involving owned aircraft ii debt secured by other assets iii securitization of future operating receipts iv the sale or monetization of certain assets v unsecured debt and vi issuance of equity or equity like securities. besides unencumbered aircraft, the company s most likely sources of liquidity include the financing of route authorities, takeoff and landing slots, spare parts, and the sale or financing of certain of amr s business units and subsidiaries, such as amr eagle. the company s ability to obtain future financing is limited by the value of its unencumbered assets. almost all of the company s aircraft assets including aircraft eligible for the benefits of section 1110 of the u.s. bankruptcy code are encumbered. also, the market value of these aircraft assets has declined in recent years, and may continue to decline. the company believes it has approximately 2 billion in assets that could be used as possible financing sources as of the date of this filing. however, many of these assets may be difficult to finance, and the availability and level of the financing sources described above cannot be assured. as of march 31, 2010, american had 35 boeing 737 800 aircraft purchase commitments for the remainder of 2010 and eight boeing 737 800 aircraft purchase commitments in 2011. in addition to these aircraft, american has firm commitments for eleven boeing 737 800 aircraft and seven boeing 777 aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2013 through 2016. in addition, american previously announced plans subject to certain reconfirmation rights to acquire 42 boeing 787 9 aircraft, with the right to acquire an additional 58 boeing 787 9 aircraft. american has selected ge aviation as the exclusive provider of engines for its expected order of boeing 787 9 aircraft. as of march 31, 2010, payments for the above purchase commitments will approximate 976 million in the remainder of 2010, 348 million in 2011, 217 million in 2012, 463 million in 2013, 224 million in 2014, and 246 million for 2015 and beyond. these amounts are net of purchase deposits currently held by the manufacturers. in 2008, the company entered into a new purchase agreement with boeing for the acquisition of 42 firm boeing 787 9 aircraft and purchase rights to acquire up to 58 additional b787 aircraft subject to certain reconfirmation rights . per the purchase agreement, the first such aircraft was scheduled to be delivered in 2012, and the last firm aircraft was scheduled to be delivered in 2018 with deliveries of additional aircraft, if any, scheduled between 2015 and 2020. the company and boeing are currently discussing a revised delivery schedule due to the impact of the overall boeing 787 program delay on american s delivery positions. the revised delivery schedule is expected to include terms and conditions consistent with the original agreement and to allow the company confirmation rights similar to those described in the company s 2009 form 10 k. the company s continued aircraft replacement strategy, and its execution of that strategy, will depend on such factors as future economic and industry conditions and the financial condition of the company. credit card processing agreements american has agreements with a number of credit card companies and processors to accept credit cards for the sale of air travel and other services. under certain of these agreements, the related credit card processor may hold back a reserve from american s credit card receivables following the occurrence of certain events, including the failure of american to maintain certain levels of liquidity as specified in each agreement . under such agreements, the amount of the reserve that may be required generally is based on the processor s exposure to the company under the applicable agreement and, in the case a reserve is required because of american s failure to maintain a certain level of liquidity, the amount of such liquidity. as of march 31, 2010, the company was not required to maintain any reserve under such agreements. if circumstances were to occur that would allow the credit card processor to require the company to maintain a reserve, the company s liquidity would be negatively impacted. pension funding obligation the company is required to make minimum contributions to its defined benefit pension plans under the minimum funding requirements of erisa, the pension funding equity act of 2004 and the pension protection act of 2006. on april 15, 2010, the company contributed 72 million to its defined benefit pension plans. cash flow activity at march 31, 2010, the company had 4.5 billion in unrestricted cash and short term investments, which is a slight increase from the balance as of december 31, 2009. net cash provided by operating activities in the three month period ended march 31, 2010 was 405 million, which was comparable to 422 million over the same period in 2009. the company made scheduled debt and capital lease payments of 181 million and invested 306 million in capital expenditures in the first three months of 2010. capital expenditures primarily consisted of new aircraft and certain aircraft modifications. the company also continued to enter into previously arranged debt and sale leasebacks upon the delivery of new aircraft in the quarter ended march 31, 2010. in the first quarter of 2010, amr received delivery of ten new aircraft financed through 297 million of various previously announced arrangements. in the past, the company has from time to time refinanced, redeemed or repurchased its debt and taken other steps to reduce its debt or lease obligations or otherwise improve its balance sheet. going forward, depending on market conditions, its cash positions and other considerations, the company may continue to take such actions. war risk insurance the u.s. government has agreed to provide commercial war risk insurance for u.s. based airlines through august 31, 2010, covering losses to employees, passengers, third parties and aircraft. if the u.s. government were to cease providing such insurance in whole or in part, it is likely that the company could obtain comparable coverage in the commercial market, but the company would incur substantially higher premiums and more restrictive terms. there can be no assurance that comparable war risk coverage will be available in the commercial market. if the company is unable to obtain adequate war risk coverage at commercially reasonable rates, the company would be adversely affected. results of operations for the three months ended march 31, 2010 and 2009 revenues the company s revenues increased approximately 229 million, or 4.7 percent, to 5.1 billion in the first quarter of 2010 from the same period last year. american s passenger revenues increased by 4.1 percent, or 151 million, on a 2.5 percent decrease in capacity available seat miles asms . american s passenger load factor increased 2.2 points to 77.9 percent while passenger yield increased by 3.7 percent to 13.35 cents. this resulted in an increase in passenger revenue per available seat mile rasm of 6.8 percent to 10.40 cents. following is additional information regarding american s domestic and international rasm and capacity three months ended march 31, 2010 rasm cents y o y change asms billions y o y change dot domestic 10.24 5.8 22.8 0.9 international 10.65 8.4 14.0 4.9 dot latin america 11.90 6.0 7.3 5.1 dot atlantic 9.29 16.8 5.0 5.5 dot pacific 9.19 0.9 1.6 1.9 the company s regional affiliates include two wholly owned subsidiaries, american eagle airlines, inc. and executive airlines, inc. collectively, amr eagle , and an independent carrier with which american has a capacity purchase agreement, chautauqua airlines, inc. chautauqua . regional affiliates passenger revenues, which are based on industry standard proration agreements for flights connecting to american flights, increased 41 million, or 9.0 percent, to 498 million as a result of a reduction in capacity, increased passenger traffic and higher yield. regional affiliates traffic remained effectively unchanged at 1.9 billion revenue passenger miles rpms , on a capacity decrease of 1.6 percent to 2.8 billion asms, resulting in a 1.2 point increase in the passenger load factor to 67.2 percent. other revenues increased 4.9 percent, or 27 million, to 580 million due to increases in baggage and aadvantage partner revenues. operating expenses the company s total operating expenses increased 6.4 percent, or 324 million, to 5.4 billion in the first quarter of 2010 compared to the first quarter of 2009. the company s operating expenses per asm in the first quarter of 2010 increased 9.2 percent to 12.91 cents compared to the first quarter of 2009. these increases are due primarily to increased fuel prices in the first quarter 2010 compared to the first quarter of 2009 and a loss of 53 million recognized as the impact of the venezuelan currency devaluation. in millions operating expenses three months ended march 31, 2010 change from 2009 percentage change wages, salaries and benefits 1,550 12 0.8 aircraft fuel 1,330 151 12.8 a regional payments to amr eagle 516 42 8.9 b other rentals and landing fees 320 25 8.5 maintenance, materials and repairs 284 41 16.9 c commissions, booking fees and credit card expense 234 17 7.8 depreciation and amortization 230 5 2.1 aircraft rentals 132 5 3.9 food service 115 1 0.9 special charges 14 100.0 other operating expenses 674 49 7.8 d total operating expenses 5,385 324 6.4 a aircraft fuel expense increased primarily due to a 16.3 percent increase in the company s price per gallon of fuel net of the impact of fuel hedging . the company recorded 45 million and 243 million in net losses on its fuel hedging contracts for the three months ended march 31, 2010 and march 31, 2009, respectively. b regional payments to amr eagle expense increased in conjunction with the 9.0 percent increase in regional affiliates passenger revenue. c maintenance, materials and repairs increased due to the timing of materials and repairs expenses. d in january 2010, the venezuelan government devalued its currency from 2.15 bolivars per u.s. dollar to 4.30 bolivars per u.s. dollar and the venezuelan economy was designated as highly inflationary. as a result, the company recognized a loss of 53 million related to the currency remeasurement. other income expense interest income decreased 6 million due to a decrease in interest rates. interest expense increased 25 million as a result of an increase in the company s long term debt balance. income tax the company did not record a net tax provision benefit associated with its first quarter 2010 or 2009 net loss due to the company providing a valuation allowance, as discussed in note 4 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. regional affiliates the following table summarizes the combined capacity purchase activity for the american connection carriers and amr eagle for the three months ended march 31, 2010 and 2009 in millions three months ended march 31, 2010 2009 revenues regional affiliates 498 457 other 34 31 532 488 expenses regional payments 541 511 other incurred expenses 88 85 629 596 in addition, passengers connecting to american s flights from american connection and amr eagle flights generated passenger revenues for american flights of 367 million and 338 million in the first quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, which are included in revenues passenger in the consolidated statements of operations. outlook the company currently expects capacity for american s mainline jet operations to increase by approximately three quarters of a percent in the second quarter of 2010 versus second quarter of 2009. american s mainline capacity for the full year 2010 is expected to increase approximately one percent from 2009 with a marginal decrease in domestic capacity and approximately a three percent growth in international capacity. the company expects second quarter 2010 mainline unit costs to increase approximately 8.0 percent year over year. the second quarter 2010 unit cost expectations reflect the projected increase in the cost of fuel year over year. in addition, unit cost increases are expected due to anticipated higher revenue related expenses such as booking fees and commissions and financing costs related to boeing 737 800 and other aircraft deliveries. due to these cost pressures, the company expects second quarter unit costs excluding fuel to also be modestly higher than the prior year period. as of the date of this form 10 q, the company's north atlantic operations are being severely impacted by the eruption of the icelandic volcano which began in april 2010. flight disruptions to and from the company s european destinations will have an adverse impact on the company's second quarter 2010 results, the magnitude of which is unknown at this time. the company s results are significantly affected by the price of jet fuel, which is in turn affected by a number of factors beyond the company s control. although fuel prices have abated considerably from the record high prices recorded in july 2008, they have steadily increased since the first quarter of 2009 and remain high and extremely volatile by historical standards. 