item 2. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations the following discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements and the related footnotes included in this quarterly report on form 10 q a, as well as the consolidated financial statements, related footnotes and management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the company's annual report on form 10 k a for the year ended december 31, 1998. 1998 acquisitions on march 30, 1998, the company, through a wholly owned subsidiary, acquired approximately 81 of the total number of then outstanding shares of common stock of coleman from a subsidiary of m f, in exchange for 14,099,749 shares of the company's common stock and approximately 160 million in cash. in addition, the company assumed approximately 1,016 million in debt. immediately thereafter, as a result of the exercise of employee stock options, sunbeam's indirect beneficial ownership of coleman decreased to approximately 79 of the total number of the outstanding shares of coleman common stock. the company's agreement for the acquisition of the remaining publicly held coleman shares pursuant to a merger transaction provides that the remaining coleman shareholders will receive o approximately 6.7 million shares of sunbeam common stock 0.5677 share for each outstanding coleman share and, o approximately 87 million in cash 6.44 for each outstanding coleman share and the cash out of unexercised coleman options for an amount equal to the difference between 27.50 per share and the exercise price of such options . the company expects to complete the coleman merger during the second half of 1999, although there can be no assurance that the merger will occur during that time. see note 2 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for information regarding the settlement claims relating to the coleman acquisition, the terms of which provide for the issuance at the time of the merger of warrants to purchase up to 4.98 million shares of sunbeam's common stock at 7 per share. on october 21, 1998, the company announced that it had entered into a memorandum of understanding to settle, subject to court approval, class action claims made by minority shareholders of coleman relating to the coleman merger. under the terms of the proposed settlement, if approved by the court, the company will issue to the coleman public shareholders, and plaintiff's counsel in this action, warrants to purchase up to 4.98 million shares of the company's common stock at a cash exercise price of 7.00 per share, subject to certain anti dilution provisions. these warrants would generally have the same terms as the warrants issued to a subsidiary of m f and will be issued when the coleman merger is consummated. issuance of these warrants will be accounted for as additional purchase consideration. there can be no assurance that the court will approve the settlement as proposed. on april 6, 1998, the company completed the cash acquisitions of first alert, a leading manufacturer of smoke and carbon monoxide detectors, and signature brands, a leading manufacturer of consumer and professional products. the first alert and the signature brands acquisitions were valued at approximately 182 million including 133 million of cash and 49 million of assumed debt and 255 million reflecting cash paid, including the required retirement or defeasance of debt , respectively. the acquisitions were recorded under the purchase method of accounting and accordingly, the financial position and results of operations of each acquired entity are included in the condensed consolidated financial statements from the respective dates of acquisition. the purchase prices of the acquired entities have been allocated to individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on estimates of fair values determined by independent appraisals at the dates of acquisition. three months ended march 31, 1999 compared to three months ended march 31, 1998 results of operations for the three months ended march 31, 1999 include the results of the three acquired companies for the entire period as compared to results of operations for the three months ended march 31, 1998, which only included the results of coleman from march 30, 1998. the acquired entities generated net sales of 347.8 million for the three months ended march 31, 1999, with a corresponding gross margin of 99.9 million, or 28.7 of net sales. selling, general and administrative sg a costs recorded by the acquired entities were 84.7 million in the period, yielding operating income of 15.2 million. results for the first quarter of 1998 included net sales from coleman of approximately 15 million, with a corresponding gross margin of approximately 4 million, and sg a expenses of approximately 4 million. for the acquired entities, net sales for the three months ended march 31, 1999 were approximately 30 million higher than their results for the full first quarter a year ago. this increase was attributable to increased net sales at coleman approximately 26 million and signature brands approximately 5 million , partially offset by a decrease in net sales at first alert approximately 1 million . excluding the revenue of coleman's safety and security business and spa business, both of which were sold in 1998, coleman's net sales in the first three months of 1999 would have been approximately 47 million higher than the same period in 1998. the increase in coleman net sales is reflective of strong retail replenishment demand in its outdoor recreation products as compared with unusually weak retail replenishment demand in the first quarter of 1998. additionally, increased generator revenues attributable to increased awareness of power shortages from poor weather conditions and other events contributed to the higher net sales. excluding i 18 the effects of purchase accounting of approximately 9 million recognized in 1999 ii acquisition costs of approximately 18 million which were incurred in the first quarter of 1998 and iii approximately 3 million of costs recorded in 1999 related to year 2000 compliance efforts, operating profit for these three companies improved by approximately 36 million as compared to the same period in the prior year, resulting primarily from higher net sales and a reduction in expenses largely attributable to reduced headcount and the centralization of certain management and administration functions, resulting from the acquisition by sunbeam. consolidated net sales for the three months ended march 31, 1999 were 523.9 million, an increase of 276.3 million versus the three months ended march 31, 1998. after excluding 347.8 million of net sales generated by the acquired entities in the 1999 period and approximately 15 million in the 1998 period, as discussed above, net sales of 176.1 million decreased approximately 24 from net sales of 233.0 million in 1998. the company believes the decrease in product sales were largely driven by increases in retail inventory levels from channel loading which took place in the first quarter of 1998, but not in the 1999 period. the adverse effect of the 1998 channel loading was partially offset by lower estimated provisions for customer returns and customer allowances of approximately 7 million. domestic sales, excluding the acquired companies, declined approximately 15 or 26 million from 1998. the company believes this sales decline is attributable to the channel loading that took place in the first quarter of 1998 versus no similar loading in the same period in 1999. the channel loading that took place in 1998 led to relatively lower sales of appliances, primarily blenders, breadmakers, handmixers and irons in 1999, as well as lower sales of outdoor cooking products. partially offsetting the adverse effects of channel loading was a benefit from reduced costs in 1999 from customer returns and allowances. international sales, excluding the acquired companies, represented 17 of net sales for 1999 and decreased approximately 31 million as compared with the net sales for the same period a year ago. the company believes this sales decline was largely attributable to the previously discussed impact of increasing retail inventory levels in the first quarter of 1998. sales were also adversely impacted in 1999 by a decision to stop selling to certain export distributors in latin america. additionally, poor economic conditions in that region contributed to lower sales in 1999. excluding the effect of the gross margin generated from the inclusion of the acquired entities' operations of 99.9 million in 1999 and approximately 4 million in 1998, as discussed above, gross margin was 23.2 million or 13.2 of sales for 1999 versus a gross margin of 29.7 million or 12.7 of net sales for 1998. lower sales volume and unfavorable manufacturing efficiencies resulting from lower production levels in 1999 accounted for approximately 18 million of the change between years. this was partially offset by a lower relative rate of product returns, reduced customer allowances of approximately 7 million, and improved product mix of approximately 2 million during the first quarter of 1999 as compared to the same period in 1998. excluding the effects of i 84.7 million of sg a charges in 1999 and approximately 4 million in 1998 resulting from the inclusion of the acquired entities ii approximately 31 million of 1998 compensation expense recorded in connection with new employment agreements with the three former senior officers iii a 3.0 million benefit in 1998 from the reversal of reserves no longer required, and iv 5.3 million of costs recorded in the 1999 period related to year 2000 compliance efforts, sg a expenses were approximately 47.9 million in the first quarter of 1999, 22.0 higher than the same period in 1998. this increase of approximately 9 million is primarily due to an increase in corporate administrative costs of approximately 5 million, reflecting additional personnel and related relocation, travel and related costs and increases in postretirement benefit costs. increases in insurance and higher costs associated with outside services account for the remainder of the increase in sg a. operating results for the first quarters of 1999 and 1998 for the sunbeam business before the 1998 acquisitions on a comparable basis as described above, were a loss of 24.7 million in 1999 and a loss of 9.6 million in 1998. on the same basis, operating margins as a percent of net sales decreased to a loss of 15.0 from a loss of 4.1 in the prior year. this change resulted from the factors discussed above. interest expense increased from 5.1 million in the first quarter of 1998 to 41.9 million in the first quarter of 1999 primarily related to higher borrowing levels in 1999 resulting from borrowings for the acquisitions that were outstanding for the entire quarter. other expense, net of 0.8 million for the first three months of 1999 included approximately 1.0 million relating to liquidating damages expensed related to holders of the zero coupon convertible senior subordinated debentures due 2018 the debentures see note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements , partially offset by favorable foreign exchange. other expense, net of 3.2 million for the first three months of 1998 primarily represents foreign exchange losses, largely arising from sunbeam's operations in mexico. the minority interest reported in 1999 relates to the minority interest held in coleman by minority shareholders. the company provided for deferred tax expense in 1999 primarily due to taxable income in foreign jurisdictions. deferred tax assets resulting from operating losses, incurred predominantly in domestic jurisdictions, were recorded and valuation allowances were established for substantially all such deferred tax assets. the company's losses and related valuation allowances caused the reported tax rate to differ from the statutory rate. on july 12, 1999, the company acquired 3,000,000 shares of a newly created series of coleman voting preferred stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately 31 million. these shares, together with the shares of coleman common stock the company owns, enable sunbeam to exercise 80.01 of the total voting power of coleman's outstanding capital stock as of july 12, 1999. this class of preferred stock was created by coleman and acquired by the company in order to enable coleman and the company to file 19 consolidated federal income tax returns, and in certain jurisdictions, consolidated state income tax returns, prior to the consummation of the coleman merger. in connection with the issuance of the shares of preferred stock, the company entered into a tax sharing agreement with coleman, pursuant to which coleman will pay to sunbeam amounts equal to the federal and state income taxes that would have been payable by coleman had coleman not been included in the consolidated income tax return of the company. the net proceeds from the issuance of the shares by coleman of its voting preferred stock to coleman worldwide were used by coleman to make a partial repayment of loans outstanding from sunbeam under the intercompany note. see note 10 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. in 1998, the company prepaid an industrial revenue bond related to its hattiesburg facility. in connection with this early extinguishment of debt, the company recognized an extraordinary charge of 8.6 million, consisting primarily of redemption premiums 7.8 million and unamortized deferred financing costs 0.8 million . foreign operations approximately 75 of the company's business is conducted in u.s. dollars including both domestic sales, u.s. dollar denominated export sales, primarily to certain latin american markets, asian sales and the majority of european sales . the company's non u.s. dollar denominated sales are made principally by subsidiaries in europe, canada, japan, latin america and mexico. mexico reverted to a hyperinflationary status for accounting purposes in 1997 therefore, translation adjustments related to mexican net monetary assets were included as a component of net loss earnings. mexico is not considered hyperinflationary as of january 1, 1999. this change in mexico's hyperinflationary status is not expected to have a material effect on the company's financial results. translation adjustments resulting from the company's non u.s. denominated subsidiaries have not had a material impact on the company's financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. while revenues generated in asia have traditionally not been significant, economic instability in this region is expected to have a negative effect on earnings. economic instability and the political environment in latin america have also affected sales in that region. it is anticipated that sales in and exports to these regions will continue to be impacted so long as the economic environments in those regions remain unsettled. on a limited basis, the company selectively uses derivatives foreign exchange option and forward contracts to manage foreign exchange exposures that arise in the normal course of business. no derivative contracts are entered into for trading or speculative purposes. the use of derivatives has not had a material impact on the company's financial results. seasonality sunbeam's consolidated sales are not expected to exhibit substantial seasonality however, sales are expected to be strongest during the second quarter of the calendar year. furthermore, sales of a number of products, including warming blankets, vaporizers, humidifiers, grills, first alert products, camping and generator products may be impacted by unseasonable weather conditions. liquidity and capital resources debt instruments in order to finance the acquisition of coleman, first alert and signature brands and to refinance substantially all of the indebtedness of the company and the three acquired companies, the company consummated an offering in march 1998 of zero coupon debentures having a yield to maturity of 5 approximately 2,014 million principal amount at maturity , which resulted in approximately 730 million of net proceeds and borrowed about 1,325 million under its new bank credit facility. the debentures are exchangeable for shares of the company 's common stock at an initial conversion rate of 6.575 shares for each 1,000 principal amount at maturity of the debentures, subject to adjustments upon occurrence of specified events. the debentures are subordinated in right of payment to all existing and future senior indebtedness of the company. the debentures are not redeemable by the company prior to march 25, 2003. on or after such date, the debentures are redeemable for cash with at least 30 days notice, at the option of the company. the company is required to purchase debentures at the option of the holder as of march 25, 2003, march 25, 2008 and march 25, 2013, at purchase prices equal to the issue price plus accrued original discount to such dates. sunbeam may, at its option, elect to pay any such purchase price in cash or common stock or any combination thereof. however, the bank credit facility prohibits the company from redeeming or repurchasing debentures for cash. the company was required to file a registration statement with the sec to register the debentures by june 23, 1998. this registration statement was filed on february 4, 1999 and the sec has not declared the registration statement effective. the company 's failure to file the registration statement by june 23, 1998 did not constitute default under the terms of the debentures. as part of the normal review process by the sec, a number of comments have been made by the staff of the division of corporation finance relating to the registration statement and the restated 1996 and 1997 financial statements included therein. the company has filed amendments to this registration statement. from june 23, 1998 until the registration statement is declared effective, the company is required to pay to the debenture holders cash liquidated damages accruing, for each day during such period, at a rate per annum equal to 0.25 during the first 90 days and 0.50 thereafter multiplied by the total of the issue price of the debentures plus the original issue discount thereon on such day. the company made its first payment of approximately 500,000 to the debenture holders on september 25, 1998 and an additional 2 million was paid on march 25, 1999. an additional cash payment of 20 approximately 2 million, representing the company's liability to debenture holders through june 30, 1999, was paid on september 25, 1999. concurrent with the acquisitions, the company replaced its 250 million syndicated unsecured five year revolving credit facility with the bank credit facility. the bank credit facility provided for aggregate borrowings of up to 1.7 billion and in addition to other customary covenants, required the company to maintain specified consolidated leverage, interest coverage and fixed charge coverage ratios as of the end of each fiscal quarter occurring after march 31, 1998 and on or prior to the latest stated maturity date for any of the borrowings under the bank credit facility. as a result of, among other things, its operating losses incurred during the first half of 1998, the company did not achieve the specified financial ratios for june 30, 1998 and it appeared unlikely that the company would achieve the specified financial ratios for september 30, 1998. consequently, the company and its lenders entered into an agreement dated as of june 30, 1998 that waived through december 31, 1998 all defaults arising from the failure of the company to satisfy the specified financial ratios for june 30, 1998 and september 30, 1998. pursuant to an agreement with the company dated as of october 19, 1998, the company 's lenders extended all of the waivers under the june 30 agreement through april 10, 1999 and also waived through such date all defaults arising from any failure by the company to satisfy the specified financial ratios for december 31, 1998. as part of the october 19, 1998 agreement, the company agreed to a minimum monthly earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ebitda covenant as defined in the bank credit facility which covenant the company had been able to satisfy. on april 10, 1999, among other things, the lenders extended all of the waivers set forth in the october 19, 1998 agreement through april 15, 1999. on april 15, 1999, the company and its lenders entered into a comprehensive amendment to the bank credit facility that, among other things, extended all of the waivers under the april 10, 1999 agreement until april 10, 2000 and waived until such date all defaults arising from any failure by the company to satisfy the specified financial ratios for any fiscal quarter end occurring during 1999 and for march 31, 2000. following is a description of the significant terms of the bank credit facility as amended april 15, 1999. as part of the april 15, 1999 bank credit facility amendment, the company agreed to a minimum cumulative ebitda covenant that is based on post december 31, 1998 consolidated ebitda and is tested at the end of each month occurring on or prior to march 31, 2000, as well as a covenant limiting the amount of revolving loans other than those used to fund the coleman merger that may be outstanding under the bank credit facility as of the end of each such month. the minimum cumulative ebitda was initially 6.3 million for the period january 1, 1999 through april 30, 1999 and generally grows on a monthly basis until it reaches 121.0 million for the period from january 1, 1999 through march 31, 2000. the bank credit facility provides for aggregate borrowings of up to 1.7 billion through o a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to 400.0 million maturing march 30, 2005, 52.5 million of which may only be used to complete the coleman merger o up to 800.0 million in term loans maturing on march 30, 2005, of which 35.0 million may only be used to complete the coleman merger and o a 500.0 million term loan maturing september 30, 2006, of which 5.0 million has already been repaid through june 30, 1999. as of march 31, 1999, approximately 1.5 billion was outstanding and approximately 0.1 billion was available for borrowing under the bank credit facility. the remaining 0.1 billion of the 1.7 billion bank credit facility was committed for outstanding letters of credit. under the bank credit facility, interest accrues, at the company 's option o at the london interbank offered rate libor o or at the base rate of the administrative agent which is generally the higher of the prime commercial lending rate of the administrative agent or the federal funds rate plus 0.50 in each case plus an interest margin which is currently 4.00 for libor borrowings and 2.50 for base rate borrowings. the interest margin is subject to potential decreases in the future, including a decrease to 3.00 for libor loans and 1.75 for base rate loans upon consummation of the coleman merger and the effectiveness of the pledge of substantially all of coleman's and its domestic subsidiaries' assets to secure the obligations under the bank credit facility. under the terms of the april 15, 1999 amendment to the bank credit facility, the company is obligated to pay the bank lenders a loan commitment fee of between 0.25 to 1.00 of the commitments under the bank credit facility as of april 15, 1999. the percentage used to calculate the fee will be determined by reference to the bank lenders' aggregate commmitments and loan exposure under the bank credit facility as they may be reduced on or before september 30, 2000. the fee is payable on the earlier of september 30, 2000 and the date the commitments are terminated and the loans and other amount payable under the bank credit facility are repaid. see note 10 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. 21 borrowings under the bank credit facility are secured by a pledge of the stock of the company's material subsidiaries, including coleman, and by a security interest in substantially all of the assets of the company and its material domestic subsidiaries, other than coleman and its material subsidiaries except as described below. currently, coleman's inventory and related assets are pledged to secure its obligations for letters of credit issued for its account under the bank credit facility. additionally, as security for coleman's note payable to the company, coleman pledged substantially all of its domestic assets, other than real property, including 66 of the stock of its direct foreign subsidiaries and domestic holding companies for its foreign subsidiaries and all of the stock of its other direct domestic subsidiaries but not the assets of coleman's subsidiaries. the pledge runs in favor of the company 's lending banks, to which the coleman note has been pledged as security for the company 's obligations to them. upon completion of the coleman merger, substantially all of coleman's assets and the assets of coleman's domestic subsidiaries will be pledged to secure the obligations under the bank credit facility. in addition, borrowings under the bank credit facility are guaranteed by a number of the company 's wholly owned material domestic subsidiaries and these subsidiary guarantees are secured as described above. upon completion of the coleman merger, coleman and each of its united states subsidiaries will become guarantors of the obligations under the bank credit facility. to the extent extensions of credit are made to any subsidiaries of the company, the obligations of such subsidiaries are guaranteed by the company. in addition to the above described financial ratios and tests, the bank credit facility contains covenants customary for credit facilities of a similar nature, including limitations on the ability of the company and its subsidiaries, including coleman, to, among other things o declare dividends or repurchase stock o prepay, redeem or repurchase debt, incur liens and engage in sale leaseback transactions o make loans and investments o incur additional debt including revolving loans under the bank credit facility o amend or otherwise alter material agreements or enter into restrictive agreements o make capital and year 2000 compliance expenditures o engage in mergers, acquisitions and asset sales o engage in transactions with specified affiliates o settle specified litigation o alter its cash management system and o alter the businesses they conduct. sunbeam is also required to comply with specified financial covenants and ratios. the bank credit facility provides for events of default customary for transactions of this type, including nonpayment, misrepresentation, breach of covenant, cross defaults, bankruptcy, material adverse change arising from compliance with erisa, material adverse judgments, entering into guarantees and change of ownership and control. it is also an event of default under the bank credit facility if the company 's registration statement in connection with the coleman merger is not declared effective by the sec on or before october 30, 1999 effective as of october 25, 1999, the bank lenders agreed to extend this date to november 30, 1999 , or if the merger does not occur within 25 business days of the effectiveness of the registration statement or if the cash consideration including any payments on account of the exercise of any appraisal rights, but excluding related legal, accounting and other customary fees and expenses to consummate the coleman merger exceeds 87.5 million. although there can be no assurance, the company anticipates that it will satisfy these conditions. furthermore, the bank credit facility requires the company to prepay term loans under the bank credit facility on each of september 30, 1999 and december 31, 1999 to the extent that cash on hand in the company 's concentration accounts plus the aggregate amount of unused revolving loan commitments on these dates excluding, for the september measurement date, 52.5 million reserved for the coleman merger , exceeds 115 million and 125 million, respectively, but the company is not required to prepay more than 69.3 million in the aggregate as a result of the provision. unless waived by the bank lenders, the failure of the company to satisfy any of the financial ratios and tests contained in the bank credit facility or the occurrence of any other event of default under the bank credit facility would entitle the bank lenders to a receive a 2.00 increase in the interest rate applicable to outstanding loans and increase the trade letter of credit fees to 1.00 and b accelerate the maturity of the outstanding borrowings under the bank credit facility and exercise all or any of their other rights and remedies. any such acceleration or other exercise of rights and remedies would likely have a material adverse effect on the company. the bank credit facility also includes provisions for the deferral of the 1999 scheduled term loan payments of 69.3 million until april 10, 2000 as a result of the satisfaction by the company on may 14, 1999 of the agreed upon conditions to the deferral. see note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. cash flows as of march 31, 1999, the company had cash and cash equivalents of 46.2 million, working capital excluding cash and cash equivalents of 385.5 million and total debt of 2.3 billion. cash used in operating activities during the first quarter of 1999 was 57.5 million compared to 134.7 million in the first quarter of 1998. this change is primarily attributable to working capital improvements partially offset by lower earnings after giving effect to non cash charges. the majority of the working capital improvements are attributable 22 the company's management of inventory levels and accounts receivable. inventories and receivables increased 65.9 million and 57.1 million, respectively, in the first quarter of 1998 as compared to 20.9 million and 35.8 million, respectively, in the first quarter of 1999. in 1998, the company built inventory levels in anticipation of sales volumes that did not materialize and offered extended credit terms to its customers. the increase in inventory during the first quarter of 1999 is largely due to the seasonal inventory build in the company's outdoor leisure division. the company participates in an accounts receivable securitization program to finance a portion of its accounts receivable. see note 4 of notes to condensed consolidated financial statements. in the first quarter of 1999, cash used in investing activities was driven by capital expenditures of 16.3 million, primarily for information systems and equipment and tooling for new products. capital spending in the comparable 1998 period was 19.5 million and was primarily for capacity expansion initiatives, including the neosho grill manufacturing facility, and equipment and tooling for new products. the new product capital spending in the 1998 period principally related to the appliance category and included costs related to water and air filtration products, blenders, standmixers and irons. cash used in investing activities in the first quarter of 1998 reflects 160.6 million for the acquisition of approximately 81 of coleman. the company anticipates 1999 capital spending to be approximately 4 to 5 of net sales, primarily related to information systems and related support, including expenditures for year 2000 readiness, new product introductions and capacity additions. cash provided by financing activities totaled 58.7 million in the first quarter of 1999 and reflects net borrowings under the company's new credit facility. cash provided by financing activities in the first quarter of 1998 was 456.1 million and reflects net proceeds from the debentures of 729.6 million, the cancellation and repayment of all outstanding balances under the company's 250 million september 1996 revolving credit facility, the repayment of certain coleman debt and the early extinguishment of the 75.0 million hattiesburg bond. in addition, cash provided by financing activities is net of 25.1 million of financing fees related to the company's 1.7 billion new credit facility and 19.0 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options. see note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. at march 31, 1999, standby and commercial letters of credit aggregated 75.1 million and were predominately for insurance, pension, environmental, workers' compensation, and international trade activities. in addition, as of march 31, 1999, surety bonds with a contract value of 66.5 million were outstanding largely for the company's pension plans and as a result of litigation judgments that are currently under appeal. for additional information relating to the debentures, the bank credit facility and the repayment of debt, see note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. the company expects to acquire the remaining equity interest in coleman pursuant to a merger transaction in which the existing coleman minority shareholders will receive 0.5677 of a share of the company's common stock, 6.44 in cash for each share of coleman common stock outstanding and warrants to purchase common stock of the company at a cash exercise price of 7.00 per share. in addition, unexercised options under coleman's stock option plans will be cashed out at a price per share equal to the difference between 27.50 and the exercise price of such options. the company expects to issue approximately 6.7 million shares of common stock and expend approximately 87 million in cash, including cash paid to option holders, to complete the coleman transaction. under a proposed settlement of certain litigation relating to the coleman merger, the company will also issue warrants to purchase up to 4.98 million shares of the company's common stock to the coleman public stockholders and the plaintiff's litigation counsel upon consummation of the coleman merger.although there can be no assurance, it is anticipated that the coleman merger will occur in the second half of fiscal 1999. the company believes its borrowing capacity under the new credit facility, cash flow from the combined operations of the company and its acquired companies, existing cash and cash equivalent balances, and its receivable securitization program will be sufficient to support working capital needs, capital and year 2000 compliance spending, and debt service through april 10, 2000. the company intends to negotiate with its lenders on an amendment to the new credit facility, negotiate with its lenders on further waiver of such covenants and other terms or refinance the new credit facility. any decisions with respect to such amendment, waiver, or refinancing will be made based on a review from time to time of the advisability of particular transactions. there can be no assurance that an amendment, further waiver of existing covenants and other terms, or refinancing will be entered into by april 10, 2000. the failure to obtain such an amendment, further waiver or debt refinancing would likely result in violation of the existing covenants and compliance with other terms, which would permit the bank lenders to accelerate the maturity of all outstanding borrowings under the new credit facility. accordingly, debt related to the new credit facility and all debt containing cross default provisions will be classified as current in the condensed consolidated balance sheet in the second quarter of 1999. in may 1998, the nyse advised the company that it did not meet the continuing listing standards of the nyse because the company did not have tangible net assets of at least 12 million and average annual net income of at least 0.6 million for 1995, 1996 and 1997. representatives from the company met with nyse officials, and in march 1999, the nyse informed the company that the company's common stock would not be delisted at that time, although the nyse would, however, continue to monitor sunbeam's financial condition and operations. on august 5, 1999, the nyse advised the company that the nyse had revised its continuing listing standards, and that the company is in compliance with the revised standards. in april 1999, the nyse advised coleman that it did not meet the nyse's continuing listing standards because coleman did not have tangible net assets of at least 12 million as of september 30, 1998 and average annual net income of at least 0.6 million for 1995, 1996 and 1997. at that time, coleman requested the nyse to continue to list the coleman common stock until completion of the merger. the nyse subsequently advised coleman that coleman also failed to satisfy certain non financial continuing listing standards. 23 on august 5, 1999, the nyse advised coleman that the nyse had revised its continuing listing standards, and that coleman is in compliance with the revised financial standards. coleman and the nyse have agreed upon a program whereby coleman will correct the deficiencies in its non financial continuing listing standards by the end of 1999. coleman is currently complying with such program. if coleman were to be delisted from the nyse, it would adversely affect coleman's ability to sell its capital stock to third parties or use its capital stock as collateral for loans. sunbeam's bank credit facility currently restricts coleman from taking such actions. by letter dated june 17, 1998, the staff of the division of enforcement of the sec advised the company that it was conducting an informal inquiry into the company 's accounting policies and procedures and requested that the company produce documents. on july 2, 1998, the sec issued a formal order of private investigation, designating officers to take testimony and pursuant to which a subpoena was served on sunbeam requiring the production of documents. on november 4, 1998, the company received another sec subpoena requiring the production of additional documents. the company has provided numerous documents to the sec staff and continues to cooperate with the sec staff. the company has, however, declined to provide the sec with material that the company believes is subject to the attorney client privilege and the work product immunity. the company cannot predict the term of such investigation or its potential outcome. the company is involved in significant litigation, including class and derivative actions, relating to events which led to the restatement of its consolidated financial statements, the issuance of the macandrews forbes warrant, the sale of the debentures and the employment agreements of messrs. dunlap and kersh. sunbeam intends to vigorously defend each of the actions, but cannot predict the outcome and is not currently able to evaluate the likelihood of the company 's success in each case or the range of potential loss. however, if the company were to lose these suits, judgments would likely have a material adverse effect on the company 's financial position, results of operations and cash flows. additionally, the company's insurance carriers have filed various suits requesting a declaratory judgment that the directors' and officers' liability insurance policies for excess coverage was invalid and or had been properly canceled by the carriers or have advised sunbeam of their intent to deny coverage under such policies. the company intends to pursue recovery from all of its insurers if damages are awarded against the company or its indemnified officers and or directors under any of the foregoing actions and to recover attorneys' fees covered under those policies. the company 's failure to obtain such insurance recoveries following an adverse judgment against the company on any of the foregoing actions could have a material adverse effect on the company 's financial position, results of operations and cash flows. amounts accrued for litigation matters represent the anticipated costs damages and or settlement amounts in connection with pending litigation and claims and related anticipated legal fees. the costs are accrued when it is both probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. the accruals are based upon the company 's assessment, after consultation with counsel, of probable loss based on the facts and circumstances of each case, the legal issues involved, the nature of the claim made, the nature of the damages sought and any relevant information about the plaintiff, and other significant factors which vary by case. when it is not possible to estimate a specific expected amount of loss to be incurred, the company evaluates the range of possible losses and records the minimum end of the range. as of march 31, 1999 the company had established accruals for litigation matters of 26.2 million representing 12.4 million and 13.8 million for estimated damages or settlement amounts and legal fees, respectively . as of december 31, 1998, the company had established accruals for litigation matters of 31.2 million representing 17.5 million and 13.7 million for estimated damages or settlements and legal fees, respectively. it is anticipated that the 26.2 million accrual will be paid as follows 17.7 million in 1999, 7.2 million in 2000 and 1.3 million in 2001. the company believes, based on information known to the company at march 31, 1999, that anticipated probable costs of litigation matters existing as of march 31, 1999 have been adequately reserved to the extent determinable. as a consumer goods manufacturer and distributor, the company faces the constant risks of product liability and related lawsuits involving claims for substantial money damages, product recall actions and higher than anticipated rates of warranty returns or other returns of goods. these claims could result in liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position and results of operations. some of the product lines the company acquired in the 1998 acquisitions have increased its exposure to product liability and related claims. the company and its subsidiaries are also involved in various lawsuits from time to time that sunbeam considers to be ordinary routine litigation incidental to its business. in the opinion of the company, the resolution of these routine matters, and of matters relating to prior operations, individually or in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on the financial position, results of operations or cash flows of the company. see note 10 to the condensed consolidated financial statements. new accounting standards effective january 1, 1999, the company adopted statement of position 98 1, accounting for the costs of computer software developed or obtained for internal use sop 98 1 . sop 98 1 requires computer software costs associated with internal use software to be expensed as incurred until certain capitalization criteria are met. adoption of this statement did not have a material impact on the company's condensed consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. in june 1998, the financial accounting standards board issued statement of financial accounting standards no. 133 sfas no. 133 , accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities, which is effective for fiscal years beginning after june 15, 24 2000. sfas no. 133 requires the recognition of all derivatives in the consolidated balance sheets as either assets or liabilities measured at fair value. the company has not yet determined the impact sfas no. 133 will have on its consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. year 2000 readiness disclosure the company is preparing for the impact of the year 2000 on its operations. year 2000 issues could include potential problems in the information technology it and non it systems that the company uses in its operations and problems in the company's products. year 2000 system failures could affect routine but critical operations such as forecasting, purchasing, production, order processing, inventory control, shipping, billing and collection. in addition, system failures could affect the company's security, payroll operations, or employee safety. the company may also be exposed to potential risks from third parties with whom the company interacts who fail to adequately address their own year 2000 issues. sunbeam's approach to year 2000 issues while the company's year 2000 readiness planning has been underway for over one year, during the third quarter of 1998 the company established a cross functional project team consisting of senior managers, assisted by three external consulting firms which were retained to provide consulting services and to assist the company in implementing its year 2000 strategy. this team is sponsored by the company's chief financial officer who reports directly to the company's chief executive officer on this issue. the audit committee of the board of directors is advised periodically on the status of the company's year 2000 readiness program. the year 2000 project team has developed a phased approach to identify and resolve year 2000 issues with many of these activities conducted in parallel. the company's approach and the anticipated timing of each phase are described below. phase 1 inventory and assessment during the first phase of sunbeam's year 2000 readiness program, the company established a year 2000 program management office pmo to centralize the management of all of the company's year 2000 projects. through this office, the company developed a corporate wide, uniform strategy for assessing and addressing the year 2000 issues. the company has completed an inventory of its hardware and software systems, manufacturing equipment, electronic data interchange, telecommunications and other technical assets potentially subject to year 2000 problems, such as security systems and controls for lighting, air conditioning, ventilation and facility access. this inventory was then entered into the company's year 2000 database along with a determination of the item's level of criticality to operations. for those inventory items anticipated to have a significant effect on the business if not corrected, the company's year 2000 program envisions repair or replacement and testing of such items. all information relative to each item is being tracked in the company's year 2000 database. the company completed most of this phase during the third and fourth quarters of 1998. the company has completed a review of the readiness of embedded microprocessors in its products and determined that none of the company's products have year 2000 date sensitive systems. phase 2 correction and testing the second phase of sunbeam's year 2000 readiness program is structured to replace, upgrade or remediate as necessary those items identified during phase 1 as requiring corrective action. sunbeam relies on its it functions to perform many tasks that are critical to its operations. significant transactions that could be impacted by not being ready for any year 2000 issues include, among others, purchases of materials, production management, order entry and fulfillment, payroll processing and billings and collections. systems and applications that have been identified by sunbeam to date as not currently year 2000 ready and which are critical to sunbeam's operations include its financial software systems, which process the order entry, purchasing, production management, general ledger, accounts receivable, and accounts payable functions, payroll applications, and critical applications in the company's manufacturing and distribution facilities, such as warehouse management applications. recognizing how dependent the entire company is on it, sunbeam decided in 1997 to replace its primary business applications with a uniform international business and accounting information system to address the systems or applications listed above as well as to improve internal reporting processes. based upon representations from the manufacturer that the current version of this uniform information system is year 2000 ready, the company has been actively upgrading its business sites that currently utilize this uniform system to the year 2000 ready version. in addition to the pre acquisition sunbeam locations which had already utilized an earlier non year 2000 ready version of this uniform business and accounting information system, eastpak, mr. coffee, health o meter and sunbeam latin america are replacing their current non year 2000 ready systems with this new uniform system. in addition, coleman europe is also replacing key business components with this new system. the company is also actively replacing and or upgrading a number of business systems that are not year 2000 ready, including those that use localized business system packages which were not candidates to be replaced by the uniform business and accounting information system. for example, at coleman approximately 2,000 mainframe software programs that are used in lieu of sunbeam's uniform business and accounting information system have been remediated and tested to be year 2000 ready. with respect to the company's non it systems for example, time and attendance, security, and in line manufacturing hardware the company is actively analyzing these items to assess any year 2000 issues. to date, no material issues have been discovered, and the company will continue to review, test and correct, if necessary, such items. 25 sunbeam has largely implemented the corrective work described above and expects to complete final testing and implementation of such systems in the third quarter and early fourth quarter of 1999. phase 3 customers, suppliers and business partners the third phase of sunbeam's year 2000 readiness program which was initiated during the third and fourth quarters of 1998 is designed to assess and interact with the company's customers, suppliers, and business partners. as part of this effort, the company surveyed 1,100 vendors and suppliers, a portion of which did not provide an initial response. during the first half of 1999, high risk vendors were contacted directly and the number of non respondents has since decreased substantially. in fact, currently only 7 of the company's vendors who were surveyed are categorized as high risk which includes non respondents. based on the most recent responses to the survey and continued evaluation, the company believes that there is only a low to a medium risk of year 2000 issues for the remaining vendors. the company will continue to monitor the year 2000 progress of the high risk vendors and has re surveyed these companies to determine the appropriate course of action. furthermore, the company is in the process of contacting alternate vendors who are year 2000 ready to replace critical vendors deemed high risk in the event that these vendors are not found to be year 2000 ready. the company is in the process of completing a verification of the year 2000 survey responses for the most critical vendors to the company. the company has responded to numerous customer inquiries about the company's year 2000 readiness. the company has verified that all of the company's major customers have planned programs to deal with year 2000 issuesand is currently completing the process of contacting its major customers to confirm they are implementing their planned programs to address year 2000 issues. in order to improve the company's communication with its customers, suppliers and business partners, the company has set up a sunbeam year 2000 telephone number and is providing year 2000 information on a company web site. phase 4 contingency planning this phase involves contingency planning for unresolved year 2000 issues, particularly any issues arising with third party suppliers. the company's year 2000 readiness program is ongoing and its ultimate scope, as well as the consideration of contingency plans, will continue to be evaluated as new information becomes available. the company has designed its year 2000 contingency plan and is in the process of implementing it. the development of the contingency plan included a process whereby the company's critical it and non it systems were evaluated for year 2000 readiness. as a result of this evaluation, the company does not expect to require additional operational equipment or significant process contingency measures. although the company does not currently believe there is significant risk associated with its third party suppliers, the contingency plan includes the continuing evaluation of the readiness of the company's suppliers and consideration of the company's inventory requirements to protect against supply disruption. this evaluation process may result in an increase in inventory during the later months of 1999. the risks of sunbeam's year 2000 approach the independent consultants assisting the company in its year 2000 readiness program have reviewed and concurred with the company's approach, have assisted in developing cost estimates and have monitored costs for the largest single component upgrade or installation of the company's uniform system of the company's year 2000 program. since sunbeam's year 2000 program was developed and is monitored with the help of independent consultants, the company did not engage another independent third party to verify the program's overall approach or total cost as the company believes that the company's exposure in this regard is mitigated. in addition, through the use of external third party diagnostic software packages that are designed to analyze the year 2000 readiness of business software programs, the company was able to identify potential year 2000 issues at coleman. given this, the company believes that it has also mitigated its risk by validating and verifying key program components. management believes that, although there are significant systems that are being modified or replaced, including the uniform business and accounting information system, sunbeam's information systems environment will be made year 2000 ready prior to january 1, 2000. sunbeam's failure to timely complete such corrective work could have a material adverse impact on the company. with respect to customers, suppliers and business partners, the failure of certain of these third parties to become year 2000 ready could also have a material adverse impact on sunbeam. for example, the failure of certain of the company's principal suppliers to have year 2000 ready internal systems could impact the company's ability to manufacture and or ship its products or to maintain adequate inventory levels for production. at this time, the company believes that the most likely worst case scenario relating to year 2000 involves potential disruptions in areas in which the company's operations must rely on third parties, such as suppliers, whose systems may not work properly after january 1, 2000. while such system failures could either directly or indirectly affect important operations of the company and its subsidiaries in a significant manner, the company cannot at present estimate either the likelihood or the potential cost of such failures. subject to the nature of the goods or services provided to the company by third parties whose operations are not made ready for year 2000 issues, the impact on sunbeam's operations could be material if appropriate contingency plans cannot be developed prior to january 1, 2000. the nature and focus of the company's efforts to address the year 2000 problem may be revised periodically as interim goals are achieved or new issues are identified. in addition, it is important to note that the description of the company's efforts and assessments necessarily involves estimates and projections with respect to activities required in the future. these estimates and projections are subject to change as work continues, and such changes may be substantial. 26 the costs to address the company's year 2000 issues during the quarter ended march 31, 1999, sunbeam had expended approximately 17 million to address year 2000 issues of which approximately 50 was recorded as capital expenditures and the remainder as sg a expense. sunbeam's current assessment of the total costs to address and remedy year 2000 issues and enhance its operating systems, including costs for the acquired companies, is approximately 60 million. this estimate includes the following categories o uniform international business and accounting systems 40 million o localized business system software upgrades and remediation 9 million o year 2000 readiness assessment and tracking 6 million o upgrade of personal computers and related software 5 million the amount to be incurred for year 2000 issues during 1999 of approximately 41 million represents over 50 of the company's total 1999 budget for information systems and related support, including year 2000 costs. a large majority of these costs are expected to be incremental expenditures that will not recur in the year 2000 or thereafter. fees and expenses related to third party consultants, who are involved in the pmo as well as the modification and replacement of software, represent approximately 75 of the total estimated cost. the balance of the total estimated cost relates primarily to software license fees and new hardware, but excludes the costs associated with company employees. sunbeam expects these expenditures to be financed through operating cash flows or borrowings, as applicable. a significant portion of these expenditures will enhance sunbeam's operating systems in addition to resolving the year 2000 issues. as sunbeam completes its assessment of the year 2000 issues, the actual expenditures incurred or to be incurred may differ materially from the amounts shown above. the bank credit facility does not permit the company to spend more than 50 million on year 2000 testing and remediation in 1999. because year 2000 readiness is critical to the business, sunbeam has redeployed some resources from non critical system enhancements to address year 2000 issues. in addition, due to the importance of it systems to the company's business, management has deferred non critical systems enhancements as much as possible. the company does not expect these redeployments and deferrals to have a material impact on the company's financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. cautionary statements certain statements in this quarterly report on form 10 q a may constitute forward looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995, as the same may be amended from time to time herein the act and in releases made by the sec from time to time. such forward looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause the actual results, performance, or achievements of the company to be materially different from any future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by such forward looking statements. statements that are not historical fact are forward looking statements. forward looking statements can be identified by, among other things, the use of forward looking language, such as the word estimate, project, intend, expect, believe, may, well, should, seeks, plans, scheduled to, anticipates, or intends, or the negative of these terms or other variations of these terms or comparable language, or by discussions of strategy or intentions, when used in connection with the company, including its management. these forward looking statements were based on various factors and were derived utilizing numerous important assumptions and other important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward looking statements. these cautionary statements are being made pursuant to the act, with the intention of obtaining the benefits of the safe harbor provisions of the act. the company cautions investors that any forward looking statements made by the company are not guarantees of future performance. important assumptions and other important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward looking statements with respect to the company include, but are not limited to risks associated with i high leverage, ii sunbeam's ability to comply with the terms of its credit agreement, including financial covenants and covenants relating to the completion of the coleman merger, or to enter into an amendment to its credit agreement containing financial covenants which it and its bank lenders find mutually acceptable, or to continue to obtain waivers from its bank lenders with respect to its compliance with the existing covenants contained in such agreement, and to continue to have access to its revolving credit facility, or the company's ability to refinance its indebtedness at acceptable rates with acceptable terms iii sunbeam's ability to integrate the recently acquired coleman, signature brands and first alert companies and expenses associated with such integration, iv sunbeam's sourcing of products from international vendors, including the ability to select reliable vendors and to avoid delays in shipments, v sunbeam's ability to maintain and increase market share for its products at anticipated margins, vi sunbeam's ability to successfully introduce new products and to provide on time delivery and a satisfactory level of customer service, vii changes in domestic and or foreign laws and regulations, including changes in tax rates, accounting standards, environmental laws, occupational, health and safety laws, viii access to foreign markets together with foreign economic conditions, including currency fluctuations and trade, monetary and or tax policies, ix uncertainty as to the effect of competition in existing and potential future lines of business, x fluctuations in the cost and availability of raw materials and or products, xi changes in the availability and costs of labor, xii effectiveness of advertising and marketing programs, xiii economic uncertainty in japan, korea and other asian countries, as well as in mexico, venezuela, and other latin american countries, xiv product quality, including excess warranty costs, product liability expenses and costs of product recalls, xv weather conditions which can have an unfavorable impact upon sales of certain of sunbeam's products, xvi the numerous lawsuits against the company and the sec investigation into the company's accounting practices and policies, and uncertainty regarding the company's available coverage on its directors' and officers' liability insurance, xvii the possibility of a recession in the united states or other countries resulting in a decrease in consumer 27 demands for the company's products, xviii actions by competitors including business combinations, new product offerings and marketing and promotional activities, and xix failure of the company and or its suppliers of goods or services to timely complete the remediation of computer systems to effectively process year 2000 information. other factors and assumptions not included in the foregoing may cause the company's actual results to materially differ from those projected. the company assumes no obligation to update any forward looking statements or these cautionary statements. 28 part ii other information 