-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 CBbz16TG4e1UcayXF3hJ/5wR/k3yxQ0pz4PfyY4MvRNSiZRVWiCHQq4PRTutugxV
 2knL9FVaVOMG8Lz2UvCIkw==

0000950129-08-001569.txt : 20080307
0000950129-08-001569.hdr.sgml : 20080307
20080306201343
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0000950129-08-001569
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		7
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20071231
FILED AS OF DATE:		20080307
DATE AS OF CHANGE:		20080306

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			Allis Chalmers Energy Inc.
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000003982
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	OIL, GAS FIELD SERVICES, NBC [1389]
		IRS NUMBER:				390126090
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			DE
		FISCAL YEAR END:			1231

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-02199
		FILM NUMBER:		08672457

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056
		BUSINESS PHONE:		713-369-0550

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		5075 WESTHEIMER
		STREET 2:		SUITE 890
		CITY:			HOUSTON
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			77056

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS CORP
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19920703

	FORMER COMPANY:	
		FORMER CONFORMED NAME:	ALLIS CHALMERS MANUFACTURING CO
		DATE OF NAME CHANGE:	19710614


10-K
1
h54724e10vk.htm
FORM 10-K - ANNUAL REPORT



e10vk



Table of Contents





 



UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND
    EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C.
    20549

 

Form 10-K

 



  
  
  




(Mark One)
    


 


 





þ
    



 


ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
    SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934




 


 


FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED
    DECEMBER 31, 2007





    OR






o
    



 


TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
    SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934




 


 


FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD
    FROM          TO          





 

Commission file number 1-2199

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY
    INC.


(Exact name of registrant as
    specified in its charter)

 



  
  
  




Delaware


 


39-0126090




(State or other jurisdiction
    of
    incorporation or organization)


 


(I.R.S. Employer
    Identification No.)




 


 


 




5075 WESTHEIMER, SUITE 890 
    HOUSTON, TEXAS


 


77056
(Zip code)




(Address of principal executive
    offices) 


 


 





 

(713) 369-0550


Registrant’s telephone
    number, including area code

 

SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE
    ACT:

 



  
  
  





Title of Security:



 



Name of Exchange:




 




    Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share


 


    New York Stock Exchange





 

SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(g) OF THE
    ACT:

 

NONE

 

    Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
    seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities
    Act.  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
    reports pursuant to Section 13 or
    15(d).  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed
    all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of
    the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding
    12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
    was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
    subject to such filing requirements for the past
    90 days.  Yes þ     No o
    

 

    Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
    pursuant to ITEM 405 of
    Regulation S-K
    is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
    of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
    information statements incorporated by reference in
    Part III of this
    Form 10-K
    or any amendment to this
    Form 10-K.  o
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
    accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated
    filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of
    “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated
    filer” and “smaller reporting company” in
    Rule 12b-2
    of the Exchange Act. (Check one):

 








 Large
    accelerated
    filer o

  Accelerated
    filer þ

 
    Non-accelerated
    filer o

  Smaller
    reporting
    company o




(Do not check if a smaller
    reporting
    company)                      
    

 

    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
    (as defined in
    Rule 12b-2
    of the Exchange
    Act).  Yes o     No þ
    

 

    The aggregate market value of the common equity held by
    non-affiliates of the registrant, computed using the closing
    price of the common stock of $22.99 per share on June 30,
    2007, as reported on the New York Stock Exchange, was
    approximately $462,009,706 (affiliates included for this
    computation only: directors, executive officers and holders of
    more than 5% of the registrant’s common stock).

 

    As of February 29, 2008 there were 35,130,914 shares
    of common stock issued and outstanding.

 

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:

 

    Certain information called for by Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and
    14 of Part III will be included in an amendment to this
    annual report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from the registrant’s
    definitive proxy statement for its 2008 annual meeting of
    stockholders.

 






 









 

TABLE OF
    CONTENTS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


 


 


Page



 





PART I




 



Item 1.


 


 


Business


 

 


     5

 



 



Item 1A.


 


 


Risk Factors


 

 


     14

 



 



Item 1B.


 


 


Unresolved Staff Comments


 

 


     26

 



 



Item 2.


 


 


Properties


 

 


    27

 



 



Item 3.


 


 


Legal Proceedings


 

 


    27

 



 



Item 4.


 


 


Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security
    Holders


 

 


     29

 




 





PART II




 



Item 5.


 


 


Market for Registrant’s Common Equity and
    Related Stockholder Matters


 

 


     29

 



 



Item 6.


 


 


Selected Financial Data


 

 


     32

 



 



Item 7.


 


 


Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
    Financial Condition and Results of Operations


 

 


     32

 



 



Item 7A.


 


 


Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about
    Market Risk


 

 


    48

 



 



Item 8.


 


 


Financial Statements


 

 


     49

 



 



Item 9.


 


 


Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on
    Accounting and Financial Disclosure


 

 


    93

 



 



Item 9A.


 


 


Controls and Procedures


 

 


    93

 



 



Item 9B.


 


 


Other Information


 

 


     94

 




 





PART III




 



Item 10.


 


 


Directors and Executive Officers of the
    Registrant


 

 


    94

 



 



Item 11.


 


 


Executive Compensation


 

 


    94

 



 



Item 12.


 


 


Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners
    and Management


 

 


    94

 



 



Item 13.


 


 


Certain Relationships and Related Transactions


 

 


    94

 



 



Item 14.


 


 


Principal Accountant Fees and Services


 

 


    94

 




 





PART IV




 



Item 15.


 


 


Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules


 

 


    95

 



 


 

 


 


    Signatures and Certifications


 

 


    96

 


 Subsidiaries of Registrant
 Consent of UHY LLP
 Certification of the Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of the Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 302
 Certification of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906








    2



Table of Contents


DEFINITIONS

 








    “air drilling” 


    A technique in which oil, natural gas, or geothermal wells are
    drilled by creating a pressure within the well that is lower
    than the reservoir pressure. The result is increased rate of
    penetration, reduced formation damage and reduced drilling costs.

 


    “blow out preventors” 


    A large safety device placed on the surface of an oil or natural
    gas well to maintain high pressure well bores.

 


    “booster” 


    A machine that increases the pressure and/or volume of air when
    used in conjunction with a compressor or a group of compressors.

 


    “capillary tubing” 


    A small diameter tubing installed in producing wells and through
    which chemicals are injected to enhance production and reduce
    corrosion and other problems.

 


    “casing” 


    A pipe placed in a drilled well to secure the well bore and
    formation.

 


    “choke manifolds” 


    An arrangement of pipes, valves and special valves on the rig
    floor that controls pressure during drilling by diverting
    pressure away from the blow-out preventors and the annulus of
    the well.

 


    “coiled tubing” 


    A small diameter tubing used to service producing and
    problematic wells and to work in high pressure applications
    during drilling, production and workover operations.

 


    “directional drilling” 


    The technique of drilling a well while varying the angle of
    direction of a well and changing the direction of a well to hit
    a specific target.

 


    “double studded adapter” 


    A device that joins two dissimilar connections on certain
    equipment, including valves, piping and blow-out preventers.

 


    “drill pipe” 


    A pipe that attaches to the drill bit to drill a well.

 


    “foam unit” 


    A compressor, a booster, a mist pump and a fuel tank all mounted
    together on one flat bed trailer to be used for completion,
    workover and/or shallow drilling operations. Foam units are
    designed to provide a small footprint and easy transport.

 


    “horizontal drilling” 


    The technique of drilling wells at a
    90-degree
    angle.

 


    “laydown machines” 


    A truck mounted machine used to move drill pipe, casing and
    tubing onto a pipe rack (from which a derrick crane lifts the
    drill pipe, casing and tubing and inserts it into the well).

 


    “land drilling rig” 


    Composed of a drawworks or hoist, a derrick, a power plant,
    rotating equipment and pumps to circulate the drilling fluid and
    the drill string.

 


    “logging-while-drilling” 


    The technique of measuring, in real time, the formation pressure
    and the position of equipment inside of a well.

 


    “measurement-while-drilling” 


    The technique used to measure direction and angle while drilling
    a well.

 


    “mist pump” 


    A drilling pump that uses mist as the circulation medium for
    injecting small amounts of foaming agent, corrosion agent and
    other chemical solutions into the well.

 


    “pulling rig” 


    A type of well-servicing rig used to pull downhole equipment,
    such as tubing, rods or the pumps from a well, and replace them
    when 




    3



Table of Contents












    necessary. A pulling rig is also used to set downhole tools and
    perform lighter jobs.

 


    “spacer spools” 


    High pressure connections or links which are stacked to elevate
    the blow out preventors to the drilling rig floor.

 


    “spiral heavy weight drill pipe” 


     A heavy drill pipe used for special applications primarily in
    directional drilling. The “spiral” design increases
    flexibility and penetration of the pipe.

 


    “straight-hole drilling” 


    The technique of drilling that allows very little or no vertical
    deviation.

 


    “test plugs” 


    A device used to test the connections of well heads and the blow
    out preventors.

 


    “torque turn service” or “torque turn
    equipment” 


    A monitoring device to insure proper makeup of the casing.

 


    “tubing” 


    A pipe placed inside the casing to allow the well to produce.

 


    “tubing work strings” 


    The tubing used on workover rigs through which high pressure
    liquids, gases or mixtures are pumped into a well to perform
    production operations.

 


    “wear bushings” 


    A device placed inside a wellhead to protect the wellhead from
    wear.

 


    “workover rigs” 


    Similar to a land drilling rig, however, they are smaller than
    the drilling rig for the same depth of well. These rigs are used
    to complete the drilled wells or to repair them whenever
    necessary.




    4



Table of Contents

 

SPECIAL
    NOTE
    REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

 

    This annual report contains forward-looking statements within
    the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933,
    as amended, or the Securities Act, regarding our business,
    financial condition, results of operations and prospects. Words
    such as expects, anticipates, intends, plans, believes, seeks,
    estimates and similar expressions or variations of such words
    are intended to identify forward-looking statements. However,
    these are not the exclusive means of identifying forward-looking
    statements. Although such forward-looking statements reflect our
    good faith judgment, such statements can only be based on facts
    and factors currently known to us. Consequently, forward-looking
    statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties,
    and actual outcomes may differ materially from the results and
    outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. Further
    information about the risks and uncertainties that may impact us
    are described in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14
    of this annual report. You should read those sections carefully.
    You should not place undue reliance on forward-looking
    statements, which speak only as of the date of this annual
    report. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any
    forward-looking statements in order to reflect any event or
    circumstance occurring after the date of this annual report or
    currently unknown facts or conditions or the occurrence of
    unanticipated events.


 

PART I.



 

ITEM 1.  BUSINESS


 

    We provide services and equipment to oil and natural gas
    exploration and production companies throughout the United
    States including Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado,
    Oklahoma, Mississippi, Wyoming, Arkansas, West Virginia,
    offshore in the Gulf of Mexico, and internationally primarily in
    Argentina and Mexico. We operate in six sectors of the oil and
    natural gas service industry: Rental Services; International
    Drilling; Directional Drilling; Tubular Services; Underbalanced
    Drilling and Production Services. Our central operating strategy
    is to provide high-quality, technologically advanced services
    and equipment. As a result of our commitment to customer
    service, we have developed strong relationships with many of the
    leading oil and natural gas companies, including both
    independents and majors.

 

    Our growth strategy is focused on identifying and pursuing
    opportunities in markets we believe are growing faster than the
    overall oilfield services industry in which we believe we can
    capitalize on our competitive strengths. Over the past several
    years, we have significantly expanded the geographic scope of
    our operations and the range of services we provide through
    strategic acquisitions and organic growth. Our organic growth
    has primarily been achieved through expanding our geographic
    scope, acquiring complementary property and equipment, hiring
    personnel to service new regions and cross-selling our products
    and services. Since 2001, we have completed 23 acquisitions,
    including six in 2005, six in 2006 and four in 2007.

 

    Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this annual
    report to “Allis-Chalmers,” “we”,
    “us”, “our” and “ours” refer to
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., together with its subsidiaries.

 

    Our annual reports on
    Form 10-K,
    quarterly reports on
    Form 10-Q,
    current reports on
    Form 8-K
    and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
    Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
    1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, are made available free
    of charge on our website at www.alchenergy.com as soon as
    reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish
    them to the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC.

 

    We have adopted a Code of Business Ethics and Conduct to provide
    guidance to our directors, officers and employees on matters of
    business ethics and conduct. Our Code of Business Ethics and
    Conduct is available on the investor relations section of our
    website.

 

    Information contained on or connected to our website is not
    incorporated by reference into this annual report on
    Form 10-K
    and should not be considered part of this report or any other
    filing we make with the SEC.

 

    Divisional and geographic financial information appears in
    “Item 8. Financial Information — Notes to
    Consolidated Financial Statements — Note 14.”



    5



Table of Contents


Our
    History

 







 
    • 


    We were incorporated in 1913 under Delaware law.


 

 
    • 


    We reorganized in bankruptcy in 1988 and sold all of our major
    businesses. From 1988 to May 2001 we had only one operating
    company in the equipment repair business.


 

 
    • 


    In May 2001, under new management we consummated a merger in
    which we acquired Oil Quip Rentals, Inc., or Oil Quip, and its
    wholly-owned subsidiary, Mountain Compressed Air, Inc., or MCA.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2001, we sold Houston Dynamic Services, Inc., our
    last pre-bankruptcy business.


 

 
    • 


    In February 2002, we acquired approximately 81% of the capital
    stock of Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services Inc., or Tubular,
    formerly known as Jens’ Oilfield Service, Inc. and
    substantially all of the capital stock of Strata Directional
    Technology, Inc., or Strata.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2003, we entered into a limited liability company
    operating agreement with M-I L.L.C., or M-I, a joint venture
    between Smith International and Schlumberger N.V., to form a
    Delaware limited liability company named AirComp LLC, or
    AirComp. Pursuant to this agreement, we owned 55% and M-I owned
    45% of AirComp.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2004, we acquired the remaining 19% of the capital
    stock of Tubular.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2004, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc., or Safco.


 

 
    • 


    In November 2004, AirComp acquired substantially all of the
    assets of Diamond Air Drilling Services, Inc. and Marquis Bit
    Co., LLC, which we refer to collectively as Diamond Air.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2004, we acquired Downhole Injection Services, LLC,
    or Downhole.


 

 
    • 


    In April 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Delta
    Rental Service, Inc., or Delta.


 

 
    • 


    In May 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Capcoil
    Tubing Services, Inc., or Capcoil.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2005, we acquired M-I’s interest in AirComp, and
    acquired the compressed air drilling assets of W. T.
    Enterprises, Inc., or W.T.


 

 
    • 


    Effective August 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock
    of Target Energy Inc., or Target.


 

 
    • 


    In September 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing assets of
    IHS/Spindletop, a division of Patterson Services, Inc., a
    subsidiary of RPC, Inc.


 

 
    • 


    In January 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty Rental Tools, Inc., or Specialty.


 

 
    • 


    In April 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Rogers Oil Tool Services, Inc., or Rogers.


 

 
    • 


    In August 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of DLS
    Drilling, Logistics & Services Corporation, or DLS.


 

 
    • 


    In October 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Petro-Rentals, Incorporated, or Petro Rentals.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Tanus Argentina S.A., or Tanus.


 

 
    • 


    In December 2006, we acquired substantially all of the assets of
    Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc., or OGR.


 

 
    • 


    In June 2007, we acquired Coker Directional, Inc., or Coker and
    merged it with Strata.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2007, we acquired Diggar Tools, LLC, or Diggar and
    merged it with Strata.


 

 
    • 


    In October 2007, we acquired Rebel Rentals, Inc. or Rebel.


 

 
    • 


    In November 2007, we acquired substantially all the assets
    Diamondback Oilfield Services, Inc. or Diamondback.



 

    As a result of these transactions, our prior results may not be
    indicative of current or future operations of those sectors.



    6



Table of Contents


Industry
    Overview

 

    We provide products and services primarily to domestic onshore
    and offshore oil and natural gas exploration and production
    companies. The main factor influencing demand for our products
    and services is the level of drilling activity by oil and
    natural gas companies, which, in turn, depends largely on
    current and anticipated future crude oil and natural gas prices
    and production depletion rates. Current industry forecasts
    suggest an increasing demand for oil and natural gas coupled
    with flat or declining production curve, which we believe should
    result in the continuation of historically high crude oil and
    natural gas commodity prices. The EIA forecasts that
    U.S. oil and natural gas consumption will increase at an
    average annual rate of 0.8% and 0.3% through 2030, respectively.
    The EIA estimates that U.S. oil and natural gas production
    will increase at an average annual rate of 0.4% and 0.3%
    respectively.

 

    We anticipate that oil and natural exploration and production
    companies will continue to increase capital spending for their
    exploration and drilling programs. According to Lehman Bros.
    Survey of E&P Spending, U.S. spending in 2008 will
    increase by 3.5% to $78.5 billion while international
    spending will increase by 16.16% to $230.24 billion. Baker
    Hughes rig count data indicates that the average total rig count
    in the United States increased 92% from an average of 918 in
    2000 to 1,763 as of February 29, 2008, while the average
    natural gas rig count increased 97% from an average of 720 in
    2000 to 1,418 as of February 29, 2008. While the number of
    rigs drilling for natural gas has increased significantly since
    the beginning of 1996, natural gas production has remained
    relatively flat over the same period of time. This is largely a
    function of increasing decline rates for natural gas wells in
    the United States. The offshore Gulf of Mexico rig count,
    however, decreased to 58 rigs at February 29, 2008 from 90
    rigs in the comparable 2007 period due to the relocation of rigs
    to the more attractive international markets. We believe that a
    continued increase in capital expenditure will be required for
    the natural gas industry to help meet the expected increased
    demand for natural gas in the United States.

 

    We believe oil and natural gas producers are becoming
    increasingly focused on their core competencies in identifying
    reserves and reducing burdensome capital and maintenance costs.
    In addition, we believe our customers are currently
    consolidating their supplier bases to streamline their
    purchasing operations and benefit from economies of scale.

 

Competitive
    Strengths

 

    We believe the following competitive strengths will enable us to
    capitalize on future opportunities:

 

Strategic position in high growth markets.  We
    focus on markets we believe are growing faster than the overall
    oilfield services industry and in which we can capitalize on our
    competitive strengths. Pursuant to this strategy, we have become
    a significant provider of products and services in directional
    drilling, underbalanced drilling and rental services. We employ
    approximately 105 full-time directional drillers, own 30
    measurement-while-drilling tools and a fleet of 300 downhole
    motors. We believe our ability to attract and retain experienced
    drillers has made us a leader in the segment. We also believe we
    are one of the largest underbalanced drillers based on amount of
    air drilling equipment with approximately 260 compressors,
    boosters and foam units enabling us to provide customized
    packages. In addition, we have significant operations in what we
    believe will be among the higher growth oil and natural gas
    producing regions within the United States and internationally,
    including the Barnett Shale in North Texas, the Arkoma, Woodford
    Shale and Anadarko Basins in Oklahoma, the Fayetteville Shale in
    Arkansas, onshore and offshore Louisiana, the Piceance Basin in
    Southern Colorado, all five oil and natural gas producing
    regions in Mexico, and all five major oil and natural gas
    producing regions of Argentina.

 

Strong relationships with diversified customer
    base.  We have strong relationships with many of
    the major and independent oil and natural gas producers and
    service companies in Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado,
    Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah, Wyoming, Arkansas, offshore in the
    Gulf of Mexico, Argentina and Mexico. Our largest customers
    include Pan American Energy, Repsol-YPF, Apache Corporation, BP,
    Anadarko Petroleum, Oxy, ConocoPhilips, Chesapeake Energy,
    Newfield Exploration, Nexen Petroleum, XTO Energy, El Paso
    Corporation, Materiales y Equipo Petroleo, or Matyep and Devon
    Energy. Since 2002, we have broadened our customer base as a
    result of our acquisitions, technical



    7



Table of Contents


    expertise and reputation for quality customer service and by
    providing customers with technologically advanced equipment and
    highly skilled operating personnel.

 

Successful execution of growth strategy.  Over
    the past six years, we have grown both organically and through
    successful acquisitions of competing businesses. Since 2001, we
    have completed 23 acquisitions. We strive to improve the
    operating performance of our acquired businesses by increasing
    their asset utilization and operating efficiency. These
    acquisitions and organic growth have expanded our geographic
    presence and customer base and, in turn, have enabled us to
    cross-sell various products and services.

 

Diversified and increased cash flow
    sources.  We operate as a diversified oilfield
    service company through our six business segments. We believe
    that our product and service offerings and geographical presence
    through our six business segments provide us with diverse
    sources of cash flow. Our acquisition of DLS in August 2006
    increased our international presence and provides stable
    long-term contracts. Our acquisition of Petro Rentals in October
    2006 significantly enhanced our production-related services and
    equipment, and our acquisition of substantially all the assets
    of OGR in December 2006 expanded our Rental Services segment and
    increased our offshore and international operations.

 

Experienced management team.  Our executive
    management team has extensive experience in the energy sector,
    and consequently has developed strong and longstanding
    relationships with many of the major and independent exploration
    and production companies. We believe that our management team
    has demonstrated its ability to grow our businesses organically,
    make strategic acquisitions and successfully integrate these
    acquired businesses into our operations.

 

Business
    Strategy

 

    The key elements of our growth strategy include:

 

Mitigate cyclical risk through balanced
    operations.  We strive to mitigate cyclical risk
    in the oilfield service sector by balancing our operations
    between onshore versus offshore; drilling versus production;
    rental tools versus service; domestic versus international; and
    natural gas versus crude oil. We will continue to shape our
    organic and acquisition growth efforts to provide further
    balance across these five categories. Part of our strategy is to
    further increase our international operations because they
    increase our exposure to crude oil and provide opportunities for
    long-term contracts.

 

Expand geographically to provide greater access and service
    to key customer segments.  We have locations in
    Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, Arkansas, Oklahoma and
    Louisiana in order to enhance our proximity to customers and
    more efficiently serve their needs. Our acquisition of DLS
    expanded our geographic footprint into Argentina and Bolivia. We
    plan to continue to establish new locations in the United States
    and internationally. In 2007, we expanded our presence
    domestically into non-traditional geographic regions
    experiencing strong growth and new drilling activity.

 

Prudently pursue strategic acquisitions.  To
    complement our organic growth, we have pursued strategic
    acquisitions which we believe are accretive to earnings,
    complement our products and services, provide new equipment and
    technology, expand our geographic footprint and market presence,
    and further diversify our customer base.

 

Expand products and services provided in existing operating
    locations.  Since the beginning of 2004, we have
    invested approximately $175.2 million in capital
    expenditures to grow our business organically by investing in
    new, technologically advanced equipment and by expanding our
    product and service offerings. This strategy is consistent with
    our belief that our customers favor modern equipment emphasizing
    efficiency and safety and integrated suppliers that can provide
    a broad product and service offering in many geographic
    locations.

 

Increase utilization of assets.  We seek to
    increase revenues and enhance margins by increasing the
    utilization of our assets with new and existing customers. We
    expect to accomplish this through leveraging longstanding
    relationships with our customers and cross-selling our suite of
    services and equipment, while taking advantage of continued
    improvements in industry fundamentals. We also expect



    8



Table of Contents


    to continue to implement this strategy in our recently expanded
    rental tools segment, thus improving the utilization and
    profitability of this newly acquired business with minimal
    additional investment.

 

Business
    Segments

 

Rental Services.  We provide specialized rental
    equipment, including premium drill pipe, spiral heavy weight
    drill pipe, tubing work strings, blow out preventors, choke
    manifolds and various valves and handling tools, for both
    onshore and offshore well drilling, completion and workover
    operations. Most wells drilled for oil and natural gas require
    some form of rental equipment in both the drilling and
    completion of a well. We have an inventory of specialized
    equipment, which includes double studded adapters, test plugs,
    wear bushings, adaptor spools, baskets, spacer spools and other
    assorted handling tools in various sizes to meet our
    customers’ demands. We charge customers for rental
    equipment on a daily basis. Our customers are liable for the
    cost of inspection, repairs and lost or damaged equipment. We
    currently provide rental equipment in Texas, Oklahoma,
    Louisiana, Mississippi, Colorado, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico
    and internationally in Malaysia, Colombia, Russia, Mexico and
    Canada.

 

    Our Rental Services segment was established with the acquisition
    of Safco in September 2004 and Delta in April 2005. We
    significantly expanded our Rental Services segment in January
    2006 with the acquisition of Specialty. Specialty had been in
    the rental business for over 25 years, providing oil and
    natural gas operators and oilfield services companies with
    rental equipment. The acquisition of Specialty gave us a broader
    scope of rental equipment to offer our existing customer base,
    and allowed us to better compete in deep water drilling
    operations in the area of premium drill pipe and handling
    equipment. The acquisition of Specialty added new customer
    relationships and enhanced our relationships with key existing
    customers. We further expanded this segment with the acquisition
    of substantially all the assets of OGR in December 2006. The
    assets we acquired included an extensive inventory of premium
    rental equipment, including drill pipe, spiral heavy weight
    drill pipe, tubing work strings, landing strings, blow out
    preventors, choke manifolds and various valves and handling
    tools for oil and natural gas drilling. Included in the
    acquisition were OGR’s facilities in Morgan City, Louisiana
    and Victoria, Texas. Our Rental Services segment currently
    operates through our subsidiary, Allis-Chalmers Rental Services
    LLC.

 

International Drilling.  We provide drilling,
    completion, workover and related services for oil and natural
    gas wells. Headquartered in Buenos Aires, Argentina, we operate
    out of the San Jorge, Cuyan, Neuquen, Austral and Noroeste
    basins of Argentina. We also offer a wide variety of other
    oilfield services such as drilling fluids and completion fluids
    and engineering and logistics to complement our customers’
    field organization.

 

    Our International Drilling segment was established with
    acquisition of DLS in August 2006 for approximately
    $117.9 million. We operate a fleet of 56 rigs, including 20
    drilling rigs and 35 service rigs (workover and pulling units)
    in Argentina and one drilling rig in Bolivia. Argentine rig
    operations are generally conducted in remote regions of the
    country and require substantial infrastructure and support. In
    2007, we placed orders for four drilling rigs and 16 service
    rigs. Four of the service rigs were delivered in the fourth
    quarter of 2007, while the remaining rigs are expected to be
    delivered throughout the first three quarters of 2008. As of
    February 29, 2008, all of our rig fleet was actively
    marketed, except for one drilling rig that is presently inactive
    and would require approximately $6.4 million in capital
    expenditures to become operational.

 

Directional Drilling.  We utilize
    state-of-the-art equipment to provide well planning and
    engineering services, directional drilling packages, downhole
    motor technology, well site directional supervision, exploratory
    and development re-entry drilling, downhole guidance services
    and other drilling services to our customers. We also provide
    logging-while-drilling and measurement-while-drilling (MWD)
    services. In 2007, we expanded our capability by completing
    three acquisitions for approximately $37.3 million in
    total. These were Coker (June 2007), Diggar (July 2007) and
    Diamondback (November 2007). These acquisitions provided
    additional directional drillers, downhole motors, and MWD tools
    and enabled us to expand our presence in the Northern Rockies
    and the Mid-Continent areas. We now have a team of approximately
    105 full-time directional drillers and maintain an
    inventory of approximately 300 drilling motors. Our
    straight-hole motors offer an opportunity to capture additional
    market share. We currently provide our directional drilling
    services in Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Colorado, Wyoming and
    West Virginia.



    9



Table of Contents


    According to Baker Hughes, as of February 29, 2008, 46% of
    all wells in the United States are drilled directionally
    and/or
    horizontally. Management believes directional drilling offers
    several advantages over conventional drilling including:

 







 
    • 


    improvement of total cumulative recoverable reserves;


 

 
    • 


    improved reservoir production performance beyond conventional
    vertical wells; and


 

 
    • 


    reduction of the number of field development wells.



 

Tubular Services.  We provide specialized
    equipment and trained operators to perform a variety of pipe
    handling services, including installing casing and tubing,
    changing out drill pipe and retrieving production tubing for
    both onshore and offshore drilling and workover operations,
    which we refer to as tubular services. All wells drilled for oil
    and natural gas require casing to be installed for drilling, and
    if the well is producing, tubing will be required in the
    completion phase. We currently provide tubular services
    primarily in Texas, Louisiana and both onshore and offshore in
    the Gulf of Mexico and Mexico.

 

    We expanded our Tubular Services in September 2005 by acquiring
    the casing and tubing assets of IHS/Spindletop, a division of
    Patterson Services, Inc., a subsidiary of RPC, Inc. We paid
    $15.7 million for RPC, Inc.’s casing and tubing
    assets, which consisted of casing and tubing installation
    equipment, including hammers, elevators, trucks, pickups, power
    units, laydown machines, casing tools and torque turn equipment.
    The acquisition of RPC, Inc.’s casing and tubing assets
    increased our capability in tubular services and expanded our
    geographic capability. We opened new field offices in Corpus
    Christi, Texas, Kilgore, Texas, Lafayette, Louisiana and Houma,
    Louisiana. The acquisition allowed us to enter the East Texas
    and Louisiana market for casing and tubing services as well as
    offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. Additionally, the acquisition
    greatly expanded our premium tubing services.

 

    In April 2006 we acquired Rogers for $13.7 million.
    Historically, Rogers rented, sold and serviced power drill pipe
    tongs and accessories and rental tongs for snubbing and well
    control applications and provided specialized tong operators for
    rental jobs. In December 2006, we merged Rogers into Tubular. We
    expanded this segment again in October 2007 with the acquisition
    of Rebel Rentals, Inc. for $7.3 million. Rebel owns an
    inventory of equipment used primarily for tubing installation
    services in the South Louisiana and Gulf Coast regions.

 

    We provide equipment used in casing and tubing services in
    Mexico to Matyep. Matyep provides equipment and services for
    offshore and onshore drilling operations to Petroleos Mexicanos,
    known as Pemex, in Villahermosa, Reynosa, Veracruz and offshore
    in the Bay of Campeche, Mexico. Matyep provides all personnel,
    repairs, maintenance, insurance and supervision for provision of
    the casing and tubing crew and torque turn service. Services to
    offshore drilling operations in Mexico are traditionally
    seasonal, with less activity during the first quarter of each
    calendar year due to weather conditions.

 

    For the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, our
    Mexico operations accounted for approximately $7.9 million,
    $6.5 million and $6.4 million, respectively, of our
    revenues. We provide extended payment terms to Matyep and
    maintain a high accounts receivable balance due to these terms.
    The accounts receivable balance was approximately
    $2.8 million at December 31, 2007 and approximately
    $3.2 million at December 31, 2006. Tubular has been
    providing services to Pemex in association with Matyep since
    1997.

 

Underbalanced Drilling.  We provide compressed
    air equipment, chemicals and other specialized products for
    underbalanced drilling and production applications. With a
    combined fleet of approximately 260 compressors, boosters and
    foam units, we believe we are one of the world’s largest
    providers of underbalanced drilling services in the United
    States. We also provide premium air hammers and bits to oil and
    natural gas companies for use in underbalanced drilling. Our
    broad and diversified product line enables us to compete in the
    underbalanced market with equipment and services packages
    engineered and customized to specifically meet customer
    requirements.

 

    Underbalanced drilling shortens the time required to drill a
    well and enhances production by minimizing formation damage.
    There is a trend in the industry to drill, complete and workover
    wells with underbalanced operations and we expect the market to
    continue to grow.



    10



Table of Contents


    In July 2005, we purchased the compressed air drilling assets of
    W. T., operating in West Texas and acquired the remaining 45%
    equity interest in AirComp from M-I. The acquired assets include
    air compressors, boosters, mist pumps, rolling stock and other
    equipment. These assets were integrated into AirComp’s
    assets and complement and add to AirComp’s product and
    service offerings. We currently provide compressed air drilling
    services in Alabama, Arkansas, Colorado, Mississippi, New
    Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, West Virginia and Wyoming.

 

Production Services.  We provide a variety of
    quality production-related rental tools and equipment and
    services, including wire line services, land and offshore
    pumping services and coil tubing. In addition, we perform
    workover services with coiled tubing units. Our production
    services segment was established with the acquisition of
    Downhole, in December 2004, and the acquisition of Capcoil, in
    May 2005. In February 2006, we merged Downhole into Capcoil and
    named the new entity Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc.,
    or Production Services. In October 2006, we expanded our
    production services segment with the acquisition of Petro
    Rentals. Petro Rentals serves both the onshore and offshore
    markets, providing a variety of quality rental tools and
    equipment and services, with an emphasis on production-related
    equipment and services, including wire line services and
    equipment, land and offshore pumping services and coiled tubing.
    On June 29, 2007, we sold our capillary tubing units and
    related equipment for approximately $16.3 million. We
    reported a gain of approximately $8.9 million. The assets
    sold represented a small portion of our Production Services
    segment.

 

    We have an inventory of specialized equipment consisting of coil
    tubing units in various sizes ranging from 1/4” to 2”
    along with nitrogen pumping and transportation equipment. We
    purchased two additional coil tubing units in 2006, one
    additional coil tubing unit was received in the first quarter of
    2007 and an additional coil tubing unit was delivered at the end
    of the second quarter of 2007. We also maintain a full range of
    stainless and carbon steel coiled tubing and related supplies
    used in the installation of the tubing. We currently provide
    production services in Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma.
    We have ordered six additional coil tubing units ranging in size
    from 1 1/4” to 2”. The units are expected to be
    delivered in the third and fourth quarters of 2008.

 

Cyclical
    Nature Of Oilfield Services Industry

 

    The oilfield services industry is highly cyclical. The most
    critical factor in assessing the outlook for the industry is the
    worldwide supply and demand for oil and the domestic supply and
    demand for natural gas. The peaks and valleys of demand are
    further apart than those of many other cyclical industries. This
    is primarily a result of the industry being driven by commodity
    demand and corresponding price increases. As demand increases,
    producers raise their prices. The price escalation enables
    producers to increase their capital expenditures. The increased
    capital expenditures ultimately result in greater revenues and
    profits for services and equipment companies. The increased
    capital expenditures also ultimately result in greater
    production which historically has resulted in increased supplies
    and reduced prices.

 

    Demand for our services has been strong throughout 2004, 2005
    and 2006. The market in 2007 was generally positive with some
    areas of weakness and some areas of growth. Certain customers
    slowed their drilling activity in 2007 in response to increased
    availability of drilling rigs and volatility of natural gas
    prices, while others remained very active. Activity in the
    U.S. Gulf of Mexico decreased in the second half of 2007
    due to the hurricane season and relocation of rigs to more
    attractive international markets. Management believes demand
    will generally remain stable in 2008 due to high oil and natural
    gas prices and the capital expenditure plans of the exploration
    and production companies, however, activity in the
    U.S. Gulf of Mexico may remain low for the next year.
    Because of these market fundamentals for oil and natural gas,
    management believes the long-term trend of activity in our
    markets is favorable. However, these factors could be more than
    offset by other developments affecting the worldwide supply and
    demand for oil and natural gas products and developments in the
    U.S. economy.

 

Customers

 

    In 2007 and 2006, one of our customers, Pan American Energy LLC
    Sucursal Argentina, or Pan American Energy, represented
    approximately 20.7% and 11.7% of our consolidated revenues,
    respectively. Pan America Energy is a joint venture that is
    owned 60% by British Petroleum and 40% by Bridas Corporation.
    Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A. Bulgheroni, two of our
    directors, may be deemed to indirectly



    11



Table of Contents


    beneficially own all of the outstanding capital stock of Bridas
    Corporation and are members of the Management Committee of Pan
    American Energy. In 2005, none of our customers accounted for
    more than 10% of our revenues. Our primary customers are the
    major and independent oil and natural gas companies operating in
    the United States, Argentina and Mexico. The loss without
    replacement of our larger existing customers could have a
    material adverse effect on our results of operations.

 

Suppliers

 

    The equipment utilized in our business is generally available
    new from manufacturers or at auction. Currently, due to the high
    level of activity in the oilfield services industry, there is a
    high demand for new and used equipment. Consequently, there is a
    limited amount of many types of equipment available at auction
    and significant backlogs on new equipment. However, the cost of
    acquiring new equipment to expand our business could increase as
    a result of the high demand for equipment in the industry.

 

Competition

 

    We experience significant competition in all areas of our
    business. In general, the markets in which we compete are highly
    fragmented, and a large number of companies offer services that
    overlap and are competitive with our services and products. We
    believe that the principal competitive factors are technical and
    mechanical capabilities, management experience, past performance
    and price. While we have considerable experience, there are many
    other companies that have comparable skills. Many of our
    competitors are larger and have greater financial resources than
    we do.

 

    The rental tool business is highly fragmented with hundreds of
    companies offering various rental tool services. Our largest
    competitors include Weatherford, Quail Rental Tools, Knight
    Rental Tools and W-H Energy Services (Thomas Tools).

 

    Our five largest competitors in the contract drilling and
    workover service business, which operate primarily in Argentina,
    are Pride International, Servicios WellTech, Ensign Energy
    Services, Nabors and Helmerich & Payne.

 

    We believe that there are five major directional drilling
    companies, Schlumberger, Halliburton, Baker Hughes, W-H Energy
    Services (Pathfinder) and Weatherford, that market both
    worldwide and in the United States as well as numerous small
    regional players.

 

    Significant competitors in the tubular markets we serve include
    Frank’s Casing Crew and Rental Tools, Weatherford, BJ
    Services, Tesco and Premier. These markets remain highly
    competitive and fragmented with numerous casing and tubing crew
    companies working in the United States. Our primary competitors
    in Mexico are South American Enterprises and Weatherford, both
    of which provide similar products and services.

 

    Our largest competitor for underbalanced drilling services is
    Weatherford. Weatherford focuses on large projects, but also
    competes in the more common compressed air, mist, foam and
    aerated mud drilling applications. Other competition comes from
    smaller regional companies.

 

    In the production services market there are numerous
    competitors, most of which have larger coiled tubing services
    operations than us.

 

Backlog

 

    We do not view backlog of orders as a significant measure for
    our business because our jobs are short-term in nature,
    typically one to 30 days, without significant on-going
    commitments.

 

Employees

 

    Our strategy includes acquiring companies with strong management
    and entering into long-term employment contracts with key
    employees in order to preserve customer relationships and assure
    continuity following acquisition. In general, we believe we have
    good relations with our employees. None of our employees, other
    than our International Drilling employees, are represented by a
    union. We actively train employees across various functions,
    which we believe is crucial to motivate our workforce and
    maximize efficiency. Employees showing a higher level of skill
    are trained on more technologically complex equipment and given
    greater responsibility. All employees are responsible for
    on-going quality assurance. At February 29, 2008, we had



    12



Table of Contents


    approximately 3,050 employees. Almost all of our
    International Drilling operations are subject to collective
    bargaining agreements. We believe that we maintain a
    satisfactory relationship with the unions to which our
    International Drilling employees belong.

 

Insurance

 

    We carry a variety of insurance coverages for our operations,
    and we are partially self-insured for certain claims in amounts
    that we believe to be customary and reasonable. However, there
    is a risk that our insurance may not be sufficient to cover any
    particular loss or that insurance may not cover all losses. We
    are responsible for the first $250,000 of claims under our
    workers compensation policy and the first $100,000 of claims
    under our general liability and medical insurance policies.
    Insurance rates have in the past been subject to wide
    fluctuation and changes in coverage could result in less
    coverage, increases in cost or higher deductibles and retentions.

 

Seasonality

 

    Oil and natural gas operations of our customers located offshore
    and onshore in the Gulf of Mexico and in Mexico may be adversely
    affected by hurricanes and tropical storms, resulting in reduced
    demand for our services. For example, in the summer of 2005, the
    Gulf of Mexico suffered an unusually high number of hurricanes
    with unusual intensity. Additionally, in August to October of
    2007 we witnessed a decline in offshore drilling rig operations
    in the Gulf of Mexico in anticipation of the hurricane season.
    Many of those rigs have not returned to the U.S. Gulf and
    have been relocated to the international markets. In addition,
    our customers’ operations in the Mid-Continent and Rocky
    Mountain regions of the United States are also adversely
    affected by seasonal weather conditions. These weather
    conditions limit our access to these job sites and our ability
    to service wells in these areas. These constraints decrease
    drilling activity and the resulting shortages or high costs
    could delay our operations and materially increase our operating
    and capital costs.

 

Federal
    Regulations and Environmental Matters

 

    Our operations are subject to federal, state and local laws and
    regulations relating to the energy industry in general and the
    environment in particular. Environmental laws have in recent
    years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose
    greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible
    parties. Because we provide services to companies producing oil
    and natural gas, which are toxic substances, we may become
    subject to claims relating to the release of such substances
    into the environment. While we are not currently aware of any
    situation involving an environmental claim that would likely
    have a material adverse effect on us, it is possible that an
    environmental claim could arise that could cause our business to
    suffer. We do not anticipate any material expenditures to comply
    with environmental regulations affecting our operations.

 

    In addition to claims based on our current operations, we are
    from time to time named in environmental claims relating to our
    activities prior to our reorganization in 1988 (See
    “Item 3. Legal Proceedings”).

 

Intellectual
    Property Rights

 

    Except for our relationships with our customers and suppliers
    described above, we do not own any patents, trademarks,
    licenses, franchises or concessions which we believe are
    material to the success of our business.



    13



Table of Contents








ITEM 1A.  


RISK
    FACTORS



 

    Our business, financial condition, results of operations and the
    trading price of our securities can be materially and adversely
    affected by many events and conditions, including the following:

 

Risks
    Associated With Our Company

 

We may
    fail to acquire additional businesses, which will restrict our
    growth and may have a material adverse effect on our stock price
    or on our ability to meet our obligations under (and the price
    of) our securities.

 

    Our business strategy is to acquire companies operating in the
    oilfield services industry. However, there can be no assurance
    that we will be successful in acquiring any additional
    companies. Successful acquisition of new companies will depend
    on various factors, including but not limited to:

 







 
    • 


    our ability to obtain financing;


 

 
    • 


    the competitive environment for acquisitions; and


 

 
    • 


    the integration and synergy issues described in the next risk
    factor.



 

    There can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire and
    successfully operate any particular business or that we will be
    able to expand into areas that we have targeted. If we fail to
    acquire additional businesses or are unable to finance such
    acquisitions, our financial condition, our results of
    operations, the price of our common stock and our ability to
    meet our obligations under long-term notes may be materially
    adversely affected.

 

    We have made numerous acquisitions during the past five years.
    As a result of these transactions, our past performance is not
    indicative of future performance, and investors should not base
    their expectations as to our future performance on our
    historical results.

 


    Difficulties in integrating acquired businesses may result in
    reduced revenues and income.

 

    We may not be able to successfully integrate the businesses of
    our operating subsidiaries or any business we may acquire in the
    future. The integration of the businesses are complex and time
    consuming, place a significant strain on management and our
    information systems, and this strain could disrupt our
    businesses. Furthermore, if our combined businesses continue to
    grow rapidly, we may be required to replace our current
    information and accounting systems with systems designed for
    companies that are larger than ours. We may be adversely
    impacted by unknown liabilities of acquired businesses. We may
    encounter substantial difficulties, costs and delays involved in
    integrating common accounting, information and communication
    systems, operating procedures, internal controls and human
    resources practices, including incompatibility of business
    cultures and the loss of key employees and customers. These
    difficulties may reduce our ability to gain customers or retain
    existing customers, and may increase operating expenses,
    resulting in reduced revenues and income and a failure to
    realize the anticipated benefits of acquisitions.

 

    In particular, the DLS and OGR acquisitions are our largest
    acquisitions to date and, consequently, the inherent integration
    risks may have a greater effect on us than the risks posed by
    our previous acquisitions. Furthermore, we will depend on these
    entities’ continued performance as a source of cash flow to
    service our debt obligations.

 

 Our
    acquisition of DLS has substantially changed the nature of our
    operations and business.

 

    Our acquisition of DLS, which established our International
    Drilling segment, has substantially changed the nature and
    geographic location of our operations and business as a result
    of the character and location of our International Drilling
    operations, which have substantially different operating
    characteristics and are in different geographic locations from
    our other businesses. Prior to the establishment of our
    International Drilling segment, we had operated as an oilfield
    services company domestically in Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico,
    Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Utah, Wyoming, offshore in the
    Gulf of Mexico, and internationally in Mexico. We had no
    significant operations in South America prior to acquiring DLS.
    Accordingly, this acquisition has subjected and will continue to
    subject us to risks inherent in operating in a foreign country
    where we did not have significant prior experience. Our
    International Drilling segment’s business consists of



    14



Table of Contents


    employing drilling and workover rigs for drilling, completion
    and repair services for oil and gas wells. We do not own any
    drilling rigs or workover rigs other than through DLS, and have
    not historically provided such services prior to our acquisition
    of DLS.

 


    Failure to maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or internal controls over financial reporting could have a
    material adverse effect on our operations.

 

    As part of our growth strategy, we have recently completed
    several acquisitions of privately-held businesses, including
    closely-held entities, and in the future, we may make additional
    strategic acquisitions of privately-held businesses. Prior to
    becoming part of our consolidated company, these acquired
    businesses have not been required to implement or maintain the
    disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls over
    financial reporting that federal law requires of publicly-held
    companies such as ours. Similarly, it is likely that our future
    acquired businesses will not have been required to maintain such
    disclosure controls and procedures or internal controls prior to
    their acquisition. Likewise, upon the completion of any future
    acquisition, we will be required to integrate the acquired
    business into our consolidated company’s system of
    disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over
    financial reporting, but we cannot assure you as to how long the
    integration process may take for any business that we may
    acquire. Furthermore, during the integration process, we may not
    be able to fully implement our consolidated disclosure controls
    and internal controls over financial reporting.

 

    Likewise, during the course of our integration of any acquired
    business, we may identify needed improvements to our or such
    acquired business’ internal controls and may be required to
    design enhanced processes and controls in order to make such
    improvements. This could result in significant delays and costs
    to us and could require us to divert substantial resources,
    including management time, from other activities.

 

    If we fail to achieve and maintain the adequacy of our
    disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls, as such standards are modified, supplemented
    or amended from time to time, we may not be able to conclude
    that we have effective disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or
    effective internal controls over financial reporting in
    accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. If:

 







 
    • 


    we are not successful in improving our financial reporting
    process, our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls over financial reporting;


 

 
    • 


    we identify deficiencies
    and/or one
    or more material weaknesses in our internal controls over
    financial reporting; or


 

 
    • 


    we are not successful in integrating acquired businesses into
    our consolidated company’s system of disclosure controls
    and procedures and internal controls over financial reporting,



 

    then our independent registered public accounting firm may be
    unable to attest that our internal control over financial
    reporting is fairly stated, or on the effectiveness of, our
    internal controls.

 

    If it is determined that our disclosure controls and procedures
    and/or our
    internal controls over financial reporting are not effective
    and/or we
    fail to satisfy the requirements of Section 404 of the
    Sarbanes-Oxley Act on a timely basis, we may not be able to
    provide reliable financial and other reports or prevent fraud,
    which, in turn, could harm our business and operating results,
    cause investors to lose confidence in the accuracy and
    completeness of our financial reports, have a material adverse
    effect on the trading price of our common stock
    and/or
    adversely affect our ability to timely file our periodic reports
    with the SEC. Any failure to timely file our periodic reports
    with the SEC may give rise to a default under the indentures
    governing our outstanding 9.0% senior notes due 2014, and
    our outstanding 8.5% senior notes due 2017 (which we refer
    to collectively as our outstanding senior notes) and any other
    debt securities we may offer and, ultimately, an acceleration of
    amounts due thereunder. In addition, a default under the
    indentures generally will also give rise to a default under our
    credit agreement and could cause the acceleration of amounts due
    under the credit agreement. If an acceleration of our
    outstanding senior notes or our other debt were to occur, we
    cannot assure you that we would have sufficient funds to repay
    such obligations.



    15



Table of Contents



    Historically, we have been dependent on a few customers
    operating in a single industry; the loss of one or more
    customers could adversely affect our financial condition and
    results of operations.

 

    Our customers are engaged in the oil and natural gas drilling
    business in the United States, Mexico and elsewhere.
    Historically, we have been dependent upon a few customers for a
    significant portion of our revenues. In 2007 and 2006, one of
    our customers, Pan American Energy represented 20.7% and 11.7%
    of our consolidated revenues, respectively. In 2005, no single
    customer generated over 10% of our revenues. Our International
    Drilling segment currently relies on one customer for a majority
    of its revenue. In 2007 and 2006, Pan American Energy
    represented 51.0% and 45.6% of our international revenues,
    respectively. This concentration of customers may increase our
    overall exposure to credit risk, and customers will likely be
    similarly affected by changes in economic and industry
    conditions. Our financial condition and results of operations
    will be materially adversely affected if one or more of our
    significant customers fails to pay us or ceases to contract with
    us for our services on terms that are favorable to us or at all.

 

Our
    international operations may expose us to political and other
    uncertainties, including risks of:

 







 
    • 


    terrorist acts, war and civil disturbances;


 

 
    • 


    changes in laws or policies regarding the award of
    contracts; and


 

 
    • 


    the inability to collect or repatriate currency, income, capital
    or assets.



 

    Part of our strategy is to prudently and opportunistically
    acquire businesses and assets that complement our existing
    products and services, and to expand our geographic footprint.
    If we make acquisitions in other countries, we may increase our
    exposure to the risks discussed above.

 

Environmental
    liabilities could result in substantial losses.

 

    Since our reorganization under the U.S. federal bankruptcy
    laws in 1988, a number of parties, including the Environmental
    Protection Agency, have asserted that we are responsible for the
    cleanup of hazardous waste sites with respect to our
    pre-bankruptcy activities. We believe that such claims are
    barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and we have not experienced
    any material expense in relation to any such claims. However, if
    we do not prevail with respect to these claims in the future, or
    if additional environmental claims are asserted against us
    relating to our current or future activities in the oil and
    natural gas industry, we could become subject to material
    environmental liabilities that could have a material adverse
    effect on our financial condition and results of operations.

 

Products
    liability claims relating to discontinued operations could
    result in substantial losses.

 

    Since our reorganization under the U.S. federal bankruptcy
    laws in 1988, we have been regularly named in products liability
    lawsuits primarily resulting from the manufacture of products
    containing asbestos. In connection with our bankruptcy, a
    special products liability trust was established and funded to
    address products liability claims. We believe that claims
    against us are barred by applicable bankruptcy law, and that the
    products liability trust will continue to be responsible for
    products liability claims. Since 1988, no court has ruled that
    we are responsible for products liability claims. However, if we
    are held responsible for product liability claims, we could
    suffer substantial losses that could have a material adverse
    effect on our financial condition and results of operations. We
    have not manufactured products containing asbestos since our
    reorganization in 1988.

 

We may
    be subject to claims for personal injury and property damage,
    which could materially adversely affect our financial condition
    and results of operations.

 

    Our products and services are used for the exploration and
    production of oil and natural gas. These operations are subject
    to inherent hazards that can cause personal injury or loss of
    life, damage to or destruction of property, equipment, the
    environment and marine life, and suspension of operations.
    Litigation arising from an accident at a location where our
    products or services are used or provided may cause us to be
    named as a defendant in lawsuits asserting potentially large
    claims. We maintain customary insurance to protect our business
    against these potential losses. Our insurance has deductibles or
    self-insured retentions and contains certain coverage
    exclusions. However, we could become subject to material
    uninsured liabilities that could have a material adverse effect
    on our financial condition and results of operations.



    16



Table of Contents


The
    loss of key executives would adversely affect our ability to
    effectively finance and manage our business, acquire new
    businesses, and obtain and retain customers.

 

    We are dependent upon the efforts and skills of our executives
    to finance and manage our business, identify and consummate
    additional acquisitions and obtain and retain customers. These
    executives include our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman
    Munawar H. Hidayatallah.

 

    In addition, our development and expansion will require
    additional experienced management and operations personnel. No
    assurance can be given that we will be able to identify and
    retain these employees. The loss of the services of one or more
    of our key executives could increase our exposure to the other
    risks described in this “Risk Factors” section. We do
    not maintain key man insurance on any of our personnel.

 

Risks
    Associated With Our Industry

 

Cyclical
    declines in oil and natural gas prices may result in reduced use
    of our services, affecting our business, financial condition and
    results of operations and our ability to meet our capital
    expenditure obligations and financial commitments.

 

    The oil and natural gas exploration and drilling business is
    highly cyclical. Generally, as oil and natural gas prices
    decrease, exploration and drilling activity declines as
    marginally profitable projects become uneconomic and are either
    delayed or eliminated. Declines in the number of operating
    drilling rigs result in reduced use of and prices for our
    services. Accordingly, when oil and natural gas prices are
    relatively low, our revenues and income will suffer. Oil and
    natural gas prices depend on many factors beyond our control,
    including the following:

 







 
    • 


    economic conditions in the United States and elsewhere;


 

 
    • 


    changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production of the Organization of Petroleum
    Exporting Countries, commonly called OPEC;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production of non-OPEC countries;


 

 
    • 


    the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other
    oil and natural gas producing activities;


 

 
    • 


    the level of global oil and natural gas inventories; and


 

 
    • 


    advances in exploration, development and production technologies.



 

    Depending on the market prices of oil and natural gas, companies
    exploring for oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their
    drilling programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling
    services. With the exception of certain contracts in Argentina
    and Mexico, our contracts are generally short-term, and oil and
    natural gas companies tend to respond quickly to upward or
    downward changes in prices. Any reduction in the demand for
    drilling services may materially erode both pricing and
    utilization rates for our services and adversely affect our
    financial results. As a result, we may suffer losses, be unable
    to make necessary capital expenditures and be unable to meet our
    financial obligations.

 

Our
    industry is highly competitive, with intense price
    competition.

 

    The markets in which we operate are highly competitive.
    Contracts are traditionally awarded on a competitive bid basis.
    Pricing is often the primary factor in determining which
    qualified contractor is awarded a job. The competitive
    environment has intensified as recent mergers among oil and
    natural gas companies have reduced the number of available
    customers. Many other oilfield services companies are larger
    than we are and have resources that are significantly greater
    than our resources. These competitors are better able to
    withstand industry downturns, compete on the basis of price and
    acquire new equipment and technologies, all of which could
    affect our revenues and profitability. These competitors compete
    with us both for customers and for acquisitions of other
    businesses. This competition may cause our business to suffer.
    We believe that competition for contracts will continue to be
    intense in the foreseeable future.



    17



Table of Contents


We may
    experience increased labor costs or the unavailability of
    skilled workers and the failure to retain key personnel could
    hurt our operations.

 

    Companies in our industry, including us, are dependent upon the
    available labor pool of skilled employees. We compete with other
    oilfield services businesses and other employers to attract and
    retain qualified personnel with the technical skills and
    experience required to provide our customers with the highest
    quality service. We are also subject to the Fair Labor Standards
    Act, which governs such matters as minimum wage, overtime and
    other working conditions. A shortage in the labor pool of
    skilled workers or other general inflationary pressures or
    changes in applicable laws and regulations could make it more
    difficult for us to attract and retain personnel and could
    require us to enhance our wage and benefits packages. There can
    be no assurance that labor costs will not increase. Any increase
    in our operating costs could cause our business to suffer.

 

Severe
    weather could have a material adverse impact on our
    business.

 

    Our business could be materially and adversely affected by
    severe weather. Repercussions of severe weather conditions may
    include:

 







 
    • 


    curtailment of services;


 

 
    • 


    weather-related damage to facilities and equipment resulting in
    suspension of operations;


 

 
    • 


    inability to deliver materials to job sites in accordance with
    contract schedules; and


 

 
    • 


    loss of productivity.



 

    For example, oil and natural gas operations of our customers
    located offshore and onshore in the Gulf of Mexico and in Mexico
    have been adversely affected by floods, hurricanes and tropical
    storms, resulting in reduced demand for our services. Further,
    our customers’ operations in the Mid-Continent and Rocky
    Mountain regions of the United States are also adversely
    affected by seasonal weather conditions. This limits our access
    to these job sites and our ability to service wells in these
    areas. These constraints decrease drilling activity and the
    resulting shortages or high costs could delay our operations and
    materially increase our operating and capital costs.

 

Our
    business may be affected by terrorist activity and by security
    measures taken in response to terrorism.

 

    We may experience loss of business or delays or defaults in
    payments from customers that have been affected by actual or
    potential terrorist activities. Some oil and natural gas
    drilling companies have implemented security measures in
    response to potential terrorist activities, including access
    restrictions, that could adversely affect our ability to market
    our services to new and existing customers and could increase
    our costs. Terrorist activities and potential terrorist
    activities and any resulting economic downturn could adversely
    impact our results of operations, impair our ability to raise
    capital or otherwise adversely affect our ability to grow our
    business.

 

We are
    subject to government regulations.

 

    We are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws
    and regulations relating to the energy industry in general and
    the environment in particular. Environmental laws have in recent
    years become more stringent and have generally sought to impose
    greater liability on a larger number of potentially responsible
    parties. Although we are not aware of any proposed material
    changes in any federal, state, local or foreign statutes, rules
    or regulations, any changes could materially affect our
    financial condition and results of operations.



    18



Table of Contents


Risks
    Associated With Our International Drilling Business and
    Industry

 

A
    material or extended decline in expenditures by oil and gas
    companies due to a decline or volatility in oil and gas prices,
    a decrease in demand for oil and gas or other factors may reduce
    demand for our International Drilling services and substantially
    reduce our revenues, profitability, cash flows and/or
    liquidity.

 

    The profitability of our International Drilling operations
    depends upon conditions in the oil and natural gas industry and,
    specifically, the level of exploration and production
    expenditures of oil and gas company customers. The oil and
    natural gas industry is cyclical and subject to governmental
    price controls. The demand for contract drilling and related
    services is directly influenced by many factors beyond our
    control, including:

 







 
    • 


    oil and natural gas prices and expectations about future prices;


 

 
    • 


    the demand for oil and natural gas, both in Latin America and
    globally;


 

 
    • 


    the cost of producing and delivering oil and natural gas;


 

 
    • 


    advances in exploration, development and production technology;


 

 
    • 


    government regulations, including governmental imposed commodity
    price controls, export controls and renationalization of a
    country’s oil and natural gas industry;


 

 
    • 


    local and international political and economic conditions;


 

 
    • 


    the ability of OPEC to set and maintain production levels and
    prices;


 

 
    • 


    the level of production by non-OPEC countries; and


 

 
    • 


    the policies of various governments regarding exploration and
    development of their oil and natural gas reserves.



 

    Depending on the factors outlined above, companies exploring for
    oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail their drilling
    programs, thereby reducing demand for drilling services. Such a
    reduction in demand may erode daily rates and utilization of our
    rigs. Any significant decrease in daily rates or utilization of
    our rigs could materially reduce our revenues, profitability,
    cash flows
    and/or
    liquidity.

 

A
    majority of our International Drilling segment’s revenues
    are derived from one customer. The termination of the contract
    with this customer could have a significant negative effect on
    the revenue and results of operations from our International
    Drilling segment.

 

    A majority of our International Drilling revenues are currently
    received pursuant to a strategic agreement with Pan American
    Energy. Additionally, in 2007 we placed orders for 16 new
    service rigs and 4 drilling rigs which will be added to this
    agreement. Pan American Energy is a joint venture that is owned
    60% by British Petroleum and 40% by Bridas Corporation, an
    affiliate of the former DLS stockholders from which we acquired
    DLS, and which we refer to collectively as the DLS sellers. This
    agreement currently has an expiration date of June 30,
    2011. However, Pan American Energy may terminate the agreement
    (i) without cause at any time with 60 days’
    notice, or (ii) in the event of a breach of the agreement
    by us if such breach is not cured within 20 days of notice
    of the breach.

 

    Because a majority of our International Drilling revenues are
    currently generated under this agreement, our International
    Drilling revenues and earnings will be materially adversely
    affected if this agreement is terminated unless we are able to
    enter into a satisfactory substitute arrangement. We cannot
    assure you that in the event of such a termination we would be
    able to enter into a substitute arrangement on terms similar to
    those contained in the current agreement with Pan American
    Energy.

 

Our
    International Drilling’s operations and financial condition
    could be affected by union activity and general labor unrest.
    Additionally, our International Drilling’s labor expenses
    could increase as a result of governmental regulation of
    payments to employees.

 

    In Argentina, labor organizations have substantial support and
    have considerable political influence. The demands of labor
    organizations have increased in recent years as a result of the
    general labor unrest and dissatisfaction resulting from the
    disparity between the cost of living and salaries in Argentina
    as a result of the devaluation of the Argentine peso. There can
    be no assurance that our International Drilling segment will



    19



Table of Contents


    not face labor disruptions in the future or that any such
    disruptions will not have a material adverse effect on our
    financial condition or results of operations.

 

    The Argentine government has in the past and may in the future
    promulgate laws, regulations and decrees requiring companies in
    the private sector to maintain minimum wage levels and provide
    specified benefits to employees, including significant mandatory
    severance payments. In the aftermath of the Argentine economic
    crisis of 2001 and 2002, both the government and private sector
    companies have experienced significant pressure from employees
    and labor organizations relating to wage levels and employee
    benefits. In early 2005, the Argentine government promised not
    to order salary increases by decree. However, there has been no
    abatement of pressure to mandate salary increases, and it is
    possible the government will adopt measures that will increase
    salaries or require our International Drilling segment to
    provide additional benefits, which would increase our costs and
    potentially reduce our International Drilling segment’s
    profitability and cash flow.

 

Rig
    upgrade, refurbishment and construction projects are subject to
    risks, including delays and cost overruns, which could have an
    adverse effect on our International Drilling segment’s
    results of operations and cash flows.

 

    Our International Drilling segment often has to make upgrade and
    refurbishment expenditures for its rig fleet to comply with our
    quality management and preventive maintenance system or
    contractual requirements or when repairs are required in
    response to an inspection by a governmental authority. We may
    also make significant expenditures when rigs are moved from one
    location to another. Additionally, we may make substantial
    expenditures for the construction of new rigs. In 2007, we
    placed orders for 16 new service rigs and 4 drilling rigs to be
    placed in service during the first three quarters of 2008. Rig
    upgrade, refurbishment and construction projects are subject to
    the risks of delay or cost overruns inherent in any large
    construction project, including the following:

 







 
    • 


    shortages of material or skilled labor;


 

 
    • 


    unforeseen engineering problems;


 

 
    • 


    unanticipated change orders;


 

 
    • 


    work stoppages;


 

 
    • 


    adverse weather conditions;


 

 
    • 


    long lead times for manufactured rig components;


 

 
    • 


    unanticipated cost increases; and


 

 
    • 


    inability to obtain the required permits or approvals.



 

    Significant cost overruns or delays could adversely affect our
    financial condition and results of operations. Additionally,
    capital expenditures for rig upgrade, refurbishment or
    construction projects could exceed our planned capital
    expenditures, impairing our ability to service its debt
    obligations.

 

An
    oversupply of comparable rigs in the geographic markets in which
    we compete could depress the utilization rates and dayrates for
    our rigs and materially reduce our revenues and
    profitability.

 

    Utilization rates, which are the number of days a rig actually
    works divided by the number of days the rig is available for
    work, and dayrates, which are the contract prices customers pay
    for rigs per day, are also affected by the total supply of
    comparable rigs available for service in the geographic markets
    in which we compete. Improvements in demand in a geographic
    market may cause our competitors to respond by moving competing
    rigs into the market, thus intensifying price competition.
    Significant new rig construction could also intensify price
    competition. In the past, there have been prolonged periods of
    rig oversupply with correspondingly depressed utilization rates
    and dayrates largely due to earlier, speculative construction of
    new rigs. Improvements in dayrates and expectations of
    longer-term, sustained improvements in utilization rates and
    dayrates for drilling rigs may lead to construction of new rigs.
    These increases in the supply of rigs could depress the
    utilization rates and dayrates for our rigs and materially
    reduce our International Drilling segment’s revenues and
    profitability.



    20



Table of Contents


Worldwide
    political and economic developments may hurt our operations
    materially.

 

    Currently, we derive substantially all of our International
    Drilling segment revenues from operations in Argentina. From
    time to time, we also generate revenues from operations in
    Bolivia. Our International Drilling operations are subject to
    the following risks, among others:

 







 
    • 


    expropriation of assets;


 

 
    • 


    nationalization of components of the energy industry in the
    geographic areas where we operate;


 

 
    • 


    foreign currency fluctuations and devaluation;


 

 
    • 


    new economic and tax policies;


 

 
    • 


    restrictions on currency, income, capital or asset repatriation;


 

 
    • 


    political instability, war and civil disturbances;


 

 
    • 


    uncertainty or instability resulting from armed hostilities or
    other crises in the Middle East or the geographic areas in which
    we operate; and


 

 
    • 


    acts of terrorism.



 

    We attempt to limit the risks of currency fluctuation and
    restrictions on currency repatriation where possible by
    obtaining contracts providing for payment of a percentage of the
    contract indexed to the U.S. dollar exchange rate. To the
    extent possible, we seek to limit our exposure to local
    currencies by matching the acceptance of local currencies to our
    local expense requirements in those currencies. Although we have
    done this in the past, we may not be able to take these actions
    in the future, thereby exposing us to foreign currency
    fluctuations that could cause our results of operations,
    financial condition and cash flows to deteriorate materially.

 

    Over the past several years, Argentina and Bolivia have
    experienced political and economic instability that resulted in
    significant changes in their general economic policies and
    regulations.

 

    Our operations are also subject to other risks, including
    foreign monetary and tax policies, expropriation,
    nationalization and nullification or modification of contracts.
    Additionally, our ability to compete may be limited by foreign
    governmental regulations that favor or require the awarding of
    contracts to local contractors or by regulations requiring
    foreign contractors to employ citizens of, or purchase supplies
    from, a particular jurisdiction. Furthermore, we may face
    governmentally imposed restrictions from time to time on its
    ability to transfer funds.

 

Devaluation
    of the Argentine peso will adversely affect our International
    Drilling segment’s results of operations.

 

    The Argentine peso has been subject to significant devaluation
    in the past and may be subject to significant fluctuations in
    the future. Given the economic and political uncertainties in
    Argentina, it is impossible to predict whether, and to what
    extent, the value of the Argentine peso may depreciate or
    appreciate against the U.S. dollar. We cannot predict how
    these uncertainties will affect our financial results, but there
    is a risk that our financial performance could be adversely
    affected. Moreover, we cannot predict whether the Argentine
    government will further modify its monetary policy and, if so,
    what effect any of these changes could have on the value of the
    Argentine peso. Such changes could have an adverse effect on our
    financial condition and results of operations.

 

Argentina
    continues to face considerable political and economic
    uncertainty.

 

    Although general economic conditions have shown improvement and
    political protests and social disturbances have diminished
    considerably since the economic crisis of 2001 and 2002, the
    rapid and radical nature of the changes in the Argentine social,
    political, economic and legal environment over the past several
    years and the absence of a clear political consensus in favor of
    any particular set of economic policies have given rise to
    significant uncertainties about the country’s economic and
    political future. It is currently unclear whether the economic
    and political instability experienced over the past several
    years will continue and it is possible that, despite recent
    economic growth, Argentina may return to a deeper recession,
    higher inflation and



    21



Table of Contents


    unemployment and greater social unrest. If instability persists,
    there could be a material adverse effect on our results of
    operations and financial condition.

 

    In the event of further social or political crisis, companies in
    Argentina may also face the risk of further civil and social
    unrest, strikes, expropriation, nationalization, forced
    renegotiation or modification of existing contracts and changes
    in taxation policies, including royalty and tax increases and
    retroactive tax claims.

 

    In addition, investments in Argentine companies may be further
    affected by changes in laws and policies of the United States
    affecting foreign trade, taxation and investment.

 

An
    increase in inflation could have a material adverse effect on
    our results of operations.

 

    The devaluation of the Argentine peso created pressures on the
    domestic price system that generated high rates of inflation in
    2002 before substantially stabilizing in 2003 and remaining
    stable in 2004. In 2005, however, inflation rates began to
    increase. In addition, in response to the economic crisis in
    2002, the federal government granted the Central Bank greater
    control over monetary policy than was available to it under the
    previous monetary regime, known as the
    “Convertibility” regime, including the ability to
    print currency, to make advances to the federal government to
    cover its anticipated budget deficit and to provide financial
    assistance to financial institutions with liquidity problems. We
    cannot assure you that inflation rates will remain stable in the
    future. Significant inflation could have a material adverse
    effect on our results of operations and financial condition.

 

Some
    of our customers may seek to cancel or renegotiate some of our
    International Drilling contracts during periods of depressed
    market conditions or if we experience operational
    difficulties.

 

    Substantially all of our International Drilling segment’s
    contracts with major customers are dayrate contracts, where we
    charge a fixed charge per day regardless of the number of days
    needed to drill the well. During depressed market conditions, a
    customer may no longer need a rig that is currently under
    contract or may be able to obtain a comparable rig at a lower
    daily rate. As a result, customers may seek to renegotiate the
    terms of their existing drilling contracts or avoid their
    obligations under those contracts. In addition, our customers
    may have the right to terminate existing contracts if we
    experience operational problems. The likelihood that a customer
    may seek to terminate a contract for operational difficulties is
    increased during periods of market weakness. The cancellation of
    a number of our drilling contracts could materially reduce our
    revenues and profitability.

 

We are
    subject to numerous governmental laws and regulations, including
    those that may impose significant liability on us for
    environmental and natural resource damages.

 

    Many aspects of our International Drilling segment’s
    operations are subject to laws and regulations that may relate
    directly or indirectly to the contract drilling and well
    servicing industries, including those requiring us to control
    the discharge of oil and other contaminants into the environment
    or otherwise relating to environmental protection. The countries
    where our International Drilling segment operates have
    environmental laws and regulations covering the discharge of oil
    and other contaminants and protection of the environment in
    connection with operations. Failure to comply with these laws
    and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative,
    civil and even criminal penalties, the imposition of remedial
    obligations, and the issuance of injunctions that may limit or
    prohibit our operations. Laws and regulations protecting the
    environment have become more stringent in recent years and may
    in certain circumstances impose strict liability, rendering us
    liable for environmental and natural resource damages without
    regard to negligence or fault on our part. These laws and
    regulations may expose us to liability for the conduct of, or
    conditions caused by, others or for acts that were in compliance
    with all applicable laws at the time the acts were performed.
    The application of these requirements, the modification of
    existing laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or
    regulations curtailing exploratory or development drilling for
    oil and gas could materially limit future contract drilling
    opportunities or materially increase our costs or both.



    22



Table of Contents


We are
    subject to hazards customary for drilling operations, which
    could adversely affect our financial performance if we are not
    adequately indemnified or insured.

 

    Substantially all of our International Drilling segment’s
    operations are subject to hazards that are customary for oil and
    natural gas drilling operations, including blowouts, reservoir
    damage, loss of well control, cratering, oil and gas well fires
    and explosions, natural disasters, pollution and mechanical
    failure. Any of these risks could result in damage to or
    destruction of drilling equipment, personal injury and property
    damage, suspension of operations or environmental damage.
    Generally, drilling contracts provide for the division of
    responsibilities between a drilling company and its customer,
    and we generally obtain indemnification from customers by
    contract for some of these risks. However, there may be
    limitations on the enforceability of indemnification provisions
    that allow a contractor to be indemnified for damages resulting
    from the contractor’s fault. To the extent that we are
    unable to transfer such risks to customers by contract or
    indemnification agreements, we generally seek protection through
    insurance. However, we have a significant amount of self-insured
    retention or deductible for certain losses relating to
    workers’ compensation, employers’ liability, general
    liability and property damage. There is no assurance that such
    insurance or indemnification agreements will adequately protect
    us against liability from all of the consequences of the hazards
    and risks described above. The occurrence of an event not fully
    insured or for which we are not indemnified against, or the
    failure of a customer or insurer to meet its indemnification or
    insurance obligations, could result in substantial losses. In
    addition, there can be no assurance that insurance will continue
    to be available to cover any or all of these risks, or, even if
    available, that insurance premiums or other costs will not rise
    significantly in the future, so as to make the cost of such
    insurance prohibitive.

 

Risks
    Associated With an Investment in Our Common Stock

 

In
    connection with our acquisitions of DLS and substantially all
    the assets of OGR, the DLS sellers have the right to designate
    two nominees for election to our board of directors and OGR has
    the right to designate one nominee for election to our board of
    directors. The interests of the DLS sellers and OGR may be
    different from yours.

 

    The DLS sellers collectively hold 3,311,300 shares of our
    common stock, representing approximately 9.4% of our issued and
    outstanding shares as of February 29, 2008. Under the
    investors rights agreement that we entered into in connection
    with the DLS acquisition, the DLS sellers have the right to
    designate two nominees for election to our board of directors.
    The stockholders of OGR hold 3.2 million shares of our
    common stock, representing approximately 9.1% of our issued and
    outstanding shares as of February 29, 2008. Under the
    investor rights agreement that we entered into in connection
    with the OGR acquisition, the stockholders of OGR have the right
    to designate one nominee for election to our board of directors.
    As a result, the DLS sellers and OGR stockholders have a greater
    ability to determine the composition of our board of directors
    and to control our future operations and strategy as compared to
    the voting power and control that could be exercised by a
    stockholder owning the same number of shares and not benefiting
    from board designation rights.

 

    Conflicts of interest between the DLS sellers and OGR
    stockholders, on the one hand, and other holders of our
    securities, on the other hand, may arise with respect to sales
    of shares of capital stock owned by the DLS sellers or OGR or
    other matters. In addition, the interests of the DLS sellers or
    OGR stockholders regarding any proposed merger or sale may
    differ from the interests of other holders of our securities.

 

    The board designation rights described above could also have the
    effect of delaying or preventing a change in our control or
    otherwise discouraging a potential acquirer from attempting to
    obtain control of us, which in turn could have a material and
    adverse effect on the market price of our securities
    and/or our
    ability to meet our obligations thereunder.

 

Our
    stock price may decrease in response to various factors, which
    could adversely affect our business and cause our stockholders
    to suffer significant losses. These factors
    include:

 







 
    • 


    decreases in prices for oil and natural gas resulting in
    decreased demand for our services;


 

 
    • 


    variations in our operating results and failure to meet
    expectations of investors and analysts;


 

 
    • 


    increases in interest rates;





    23



Table of Contents

 







 
    • 


    the loss of customers;


 

 
    • 


    failure of customers to pay for our services;


 

 
    • 


    competition;


 

 
    • 


    illiquidity of the market for our common stock;


 

 
    • 


    developments specifically affecting the Argentine economy;


 

 
    • 


    sales of common stock by existing stockholders; and


 

 
    • 


    other developments affecting us or the financial markets.



 

    A reduced stock price will result in a loss to investors and
    will adversely affect our ability to issue stock to fund our
    activities.

 

Existing
    stockholders’ interest in us may be diluted by additional
    issuances of equity securities.

 

    We expect to issue additional equity securities to fund the
    acquisition of additional businesses and pursuant to employee
    benefit plans. We may also issue additional equity securities
    for other purposes. These securities may have the same rights as
    our common stock or, alternatively, may have dividend,
    liquidation, or other preferences to our common stock. The
    issuance of additional equity securities will dilute the
    holdings of existing stockholders and may reduce the share price
    of our common stock.

 

We do
    not expect to pay dividends on our common stock, and investors
    will be able to receive cash in respect of the shares of common
    stock only upon the sale of the shares.

 

    We have not paid any cash dividends on our common stock within
    the last ten years, and we have no intention in the foreseeable
    future to pay any cash dividends on our common stock.
    Furthermore, our credit agreement and the indentures governing
    our outstanding senior notes restrict our ability to pay
    dividends on our common stock. Therefore, an investor in our
    common stock will obtain an economic benefit from the common
    stock only after an increase in its trading price and only by
    selling the common stock.

 

Substantial
    sales of our common stock could adversely affect our stock
    price.

 

    Sales of a substantial number of shares of common stock, or the
    perception that such sales could occur, could adversely affect
    the market price of our common stock by introducing a large
    number of sellers to the market. Such sales could cause the
    market price of our common stock to decline.

 

    We have 35,130,914 shares outstanding as of
    February 29, 2008. At December 31, 2007, we had
    reserved an additional 2,323,728 shares of common stock for
    issuance under our equity compensation plans, of which
    982,763 shares were issuable upon the exercise of
    outstanding options with a weighted average exercise price of
    $10.77 per share and 710,000 shares were issuable under
    restricted stock award grants subject to performance based
    vesting. In addition, we have reserved 4,000 shares of
    common stock for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding
    options (with an exercise price of $13.75 per share) granted to
    former and continuing board members in 1999 and 2000.

 

    In connection with our acquisition of DLS, we entered into an
    investors rights agreement with the seller parties to the DLS
    stock purchase agreement, who collectively hold
    3,311,300 shares of our common stock as of
    February 29, 2008. In connection with our acquisition of
    substantially all the assets of OGR, we entered into an investor
    rights agreement with the stockholders of OGR, who hold
    3.2 million shares of our common stock. Under these
    agreements, the DLS sellers and the OGR stockholders are
    entitled to certain rights with respect to the registration of
    the sale of such shares under the Securities Act. By exercising
    their registration rights and causing a large number of shares
    to be sold in the public market, these holders could cause the
    market price of our common stock to decline.

 

    We cannot predict whether future sales of our common stock, or
    the availability of our common stock for sale, will adversely
    affect the market price for our common stock or our ability to
    raise capital by offering equity securities.



    24



Table of Contents


Risks
    Associated With Our Indebtedness

 

We
    have a substantial amount of debt, which could adversely affect
    our financial health and prevent us from making principal and
    interest payments on our outstanding senior notes and our other
    debt.

 

    At December 31, 2007, we had approximately
    $514.7 million of consolidated total indebtedness
    outstanding and approximately $81.6 million of additional
    secured borrowing capacity available under our credit agreement.

 

    Our substantial debt could:

 







 
    • 


    make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with
    respect to our outstanding senior notes, any other debt
    securities we may offer and our other debt;


 

 
    • 


    increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and
    industry conditions, including declines in oil and natural gas
    prices and declines in drilling activities;


 

 
    • 


    limit our ability to obtain additional financing for future
    working capital, capital expenditures, mergers and other general
    corporate purposes;


 

 
    • 


    require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow
    from operations to payments on our debt, thereby reducing the
    availability of our cash flow for operations and other purposes;


 

 
    • 


    limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes
    in our business and the industry in which we operate;


 

 
    • 


    make us more vulnerable to increases in interest rates;


 

 
    • 


    place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our
    competitors that have less debt; and


 

 
    • 


    have a material adverse effect on us if we fail to comply with
    the covenants in the indentures relating to our outstanding
    senior notes, and any other debt securities we may offer or in
    the instruments governing our other debt.



 

    In addition, we may incur substantial additional debt in the
    future. Each of the indentures governing our outstanding senior
    notes permits (and we anticipate that the indentures governing
    any other debt securities we may offer will also permit) us to
    incur additional debt, and our credit agreement permits
    additional borrowings. If new debt is added to our current debt
    levels, these related risks could increase.

 

    We may not maintain sufficient revenues to sustain profitability
    or to meet our capital expenditure requirements and our
    financial obligations. Also, we may not be able to generate a
    sufficient amount of cash flow to meet our debt service
    obligations.

 

    Our ability to make scheduled payments or to refinance our
    obligations with respect to our debt will depend on our
    financial and operating performance, which, in turn, is subject
    to prevailing economic conditions and to certain financial,
    business, and other factors beyond our control. If our cash flow
    and capital resources are insufficient to fund our debt service
    obligations, we may be forced to reduce or delay scheduled
    expansion and capital expenditures, sell material assets or
    operations, obtain additional capital or restructure our debt.
    We cannot assure you that our operating performance, cash flow
    and capital resources will be sufficient for payment of our debt
    in the future. In the event that we are required to dispose of
    material assets or operations or restructure our debt to meet
    our debt service and other obligations, we cannot assure you
    that the terms of any such transaction would be satisfactory to
    us or if or how soon any such transaction could be completed.

 

If we
    fail to obtain additional financing, we may be unable to
    refinance our existing debt, expand our current operations or
    acquire new businesses, which could result in a failure to grow
    or result in defaults in our obligations under our credit
    agreement, our outstanding senior notes or our other debt
    securities.

 

    In order to refinance indebtedness, expand existing operations
    and acquire additional businesses, we will require substantial
    amounts of capital. There can be no assurance that financing,
    whether from equity or debt financings or other sources, will be
    available or, if available, will be on terms satisfactory to us.
    If we are unable to obtain such financing, we will be unable to
    acquire additional businesses and may be unable to meet our
    obligations under our credit agreement, our senior notes or any
    other debt securities we may offer.



    25



Table of Contents


The
    indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and our credit
    agreement impose (and we anticipate that the indentures
    governing any other debt securities we may offer will also
    impose) restrictions on us that may limit the discretion of
    management in operating our business and that, in turn, could
    impair our ability to meet our obligations.

 

    The indentures governing our outstanding senior notes and our
    credit agreement contain (and we anticipate that the indentures
    governing any other debt securities we may offer will also
    contain) various restrictive covenants that limit
    management’s discretion in operating our business. In
    particular, these covenants limit our ability to, among other
    things:

 







 
    • 


    incur additional debt;


 

 
    • 


    make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on
    our capital stock or purchase or redeem or retire capital stock;


 

 
    • 


    sell assets, including capital stock of our restricted
    subsidiaries;


 

 
    • 


    restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries;


 

 
    • 


    create liens;


 

 
    • 


    enter into transactions with affiliates; and


 

 
    • 


    merge or consolidate with another company.



 

    The credit agreement also requires us to maintain specified
    financial ratios and satisfy certain financial tests. Our
    ability to maintain or meet such financial ratios and tests may
    be affected by events beyond our control, including changes in
    general economic and business conditions, and we cannot assure
    you that we will maintain or meet such ratios and tests or that
    the lenders under the credit agreement will waive any failure to
    meet such ratios or tests.

 

    These covenants could materially and adversely affect our
    ability to finance our future operations or capital needs.
    Furthermore, they may restrict our ability to expand, to pursue
    our business strategies and otherwise to conduct our business.
    Our ability to comply with these covenants may be affected by
    circumstances and events beyond our control, such as prevailing
    economic conditions and changes in regulations, and we cannot
    assure you that we will be able to comply with them. A breach of
    these covenants could result in a default under the indentures
    governing our outstanding senior notes and any other debt
    securities we may offer
    and/or the
    credit agreement. If there were an event of default under any of
    the indentures
    and/or the
    credit agreement, the affected creditors could cause all amounts
    borrowed under these instruments to be due and payable
    immediately. Additionally, if we fail to repay indebtedness
    under our credit agreement when it becomes due, the lenders
    under the credit agreement could proceed against the assets
    which we have pledged to them as security. Our assets and cash
    flow might not be sufficient to repay our outstanding debt in
    the event of a default.

 







ITEM 1B.  


UNRESOLVED
    STAFF COMMENTS



 

    None.



    26



Table of Contents








ITEM 2.  


PROPERTIES



 

    The following table describes the location and general character
    of the principal physical properties used in each of our
    company’s businesses as of February 29, 2008. Our
    principal executive office is rented and located in Houston,
    Texas and the table below presents all of our operating
    locations and whether the property is owned or leased.

 



  
  
  
  
  





Business Segment



 



Location



 



Owned/Leased




 





    Rental Services



 


    Houston, Texas


 


    Leased — 2 locations




 


 


    Victoria, Texas


 


    Owned




 


 


    Broussard, Louisiana


 


    Leased




 


 


    Lafayette, Louisiana


 


    Leased




 


 


    Morgan City, Louisiana


 


    Owned





    International Drilling



 


    Buenos Aires, Argentina


 


    Leased




 


 


    Comodoro Rivadavia, Argentina


 


    Owned




 


 


    Neuquen, Argentina


 


    Owned




 


 


    Rincon de los Sauces, Argentina


 


    Owned




 


 


    Tartagal, Argentina


 


    Owned




 


 


    Santa Cruz, Bolivia


 


    Leased





    Directional Drilling



 


    Conroe, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Houston, Texas


 


    Leased — 2 locations




 


 


    Oklahoma City, Oklahoma


 


    Leased




 


 


    Denver, Colorado


 


    Leased




 


 


    Casper, Wyoming


 


    Leased





    Tubular Services



 


    Corpus Christi, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Edinburg, Texas


 


    Owned




 


 


    Kilgore, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Pearsall, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Broussard, Louisiana


 


    Leased — 2 locations




 


 


    Houma, Louisiana


 


    Leased




 


 


    Youngsville, Louisiana


 


    Owned




 


 


    Elk City, Oklahoma


 


    Leased





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


    Fort Stockton, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Grandbury, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Houston, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Midland, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    San Angelo, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Sonora, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Carlsbad, New Mexico


 


    Leased




 


 


    Farmington, New Mexico


 


    Leased




 


 


    Mt Morris, Pennsylvania


 


    Leased




 


 


    Grand Junction, Colorado


 


    Leased




 


 


    Wilburton, Oklahoma


 


    Leased





    Production Services



 


    Searcy, Arkansas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Alvin, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Corpus Christi, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Longview, Texas


 


    Leased




 


 


    Broussard, Louisiana


 


    1 Owned & 1 Leased




 


 


    Houma, Louisiana


 


    Leased





 







ITEM 3.  


LEGAL
    PROCEEDINGS



 

    On June 29, 1987, we filed for reorganization under
    Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. Our plan
    of reorganization was confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court after
    acceptance by our creditors and stockholders, and was
    consummated on December 2, 1988.



    27



Table of Contents


    At confirmation of our plan of reorganization, the United States
    Bankruptcy Court approved the establishment of the A-C
    Reorganization Trust as the primary vehicle for distributions
    and the administration of claims under our plan of
    reorganization, two trust funds to service health care and life
    insurance programs for retired employees and a trust fund to
    process and liquidate future product liability claims. The
    trusts assumed responsibility for substantially all remaining
    cash distributions to be made to holders of claims and interests
    pursuant to our plan of reorganization. We were thereby
    discharged of all debts that arose before confirmation of our
    plan of reorganization.

 

    We do not administer any of the aforementioned trusts and retain
    no responsibility for the assets transferred to or distributions
    to be made by such trusts pursuant to our plan of reorganization.

 

    As part of our plan of reorganization, we settled
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency claims for cleanup
    costs at all known sites where we were alleged to have disposed
    of hazardous waste. The EPA settlement included both past and
    future cleanup costs at these sites and released us of liability
    to other potentially responsible parties in connection with
    these specific sites. In addition, we negotiated settlements of
    various environmental claims asserted by certain state
    environmental protection agencies.

 

    Subsequent to our bankruptcy reorganization, the EPA and state
    environmental protection agencies have in a few cases asserted
    that we are liable for cleanup costs or fines in connection with
    several hazardous waste disposal sites containing products
    manufactured by us prior to consummation of our plan of
    reorganization. In each instance, we have taken the position
    that the cleanup costs and all other liabilities related to
    these sites were discharged in the bankruptcy, and the cases
    have been disposed of without material cost. A number of Federal
    Courts of Appeal have issued rulings consistent with this
    position, and based on such rulings, we believe that we will
    continue to prevail in our position that our liability to the
    EPA and third parties for claims for environmental cleanup costs
    that had pre-petition triggers have been discharged. A number of
    claimants have asserted claims for environmental cleanup costs
    that had pre-petition triggers, and in each event, the A-C
    Reorganization Trust, under its mandate to provide plan of
    reorganization implementation services to us, has responded to
    such claims, generally, by informing claimants that our
    liabilities were discharged in the bankruptcy. Each of such
    claims has been disposed of without material cost. However,
    there can be no assurance that we will not be subject to
    environmental claims relating to pre-bankruptcy activities that
    would have a material adverse effect on us.

 

    The EPA and certain state agencies continue from time to time to
    request information in connection with various waste disposal
    sites containing products manufactured by us before consummation
    of the plan of reorganization that were disposed of by other
    parties. Although we have been discharged of liabilities with
    respect to hazardous waste sites, we are under a continuing
    obligation to provide information with respect to our products
    to federal and state agencies. The A-C Reorganization Trust,
    under its mandate to provide plan of reorganization
    implementation services to us, has responded to these
    informational requests because pre-bankruptcy activities are
    involved.

 

    The A-C Reorganization Trust is being dissolved, and as a
    result, we will assume the responsibility of responding to
    claimants and to the EPA and state agencies previously
    undertaken by the A-C Reorganization Trust. However, we have
    been advised by the A-C Reorganization Trust that its cost of
    providing these services has not been material in the past, and
    therefore we do not expect to incur material expenses as a
    result of responding to such requests. However, there can be no
    assurance that we will not be subject to environmental claims
    relating to pre-bankruptcy activities that would have a material
    adverse effect on us.

 

    We are named as a defendant from time to time in product
    liability lawsuits alleging personal injuries resulting from our
    activities prior to our reorganization involving asbestos. These
    claims are referred to and handled by a special products
    liability trust formed to be responsible for such claims in
    connection with our reorganization. As with environmental
    claims, we do not believe we are liable for product liability
    claims relating to our business prior to our bankruptcy;
    moreover, the products liability trust continues to defend all
    such claims. However, there can be no assurance that we will not
    be subject to material product liability claims in the future or
    that the products liability trust will continue to have funds to
    pay any such claims.

 

    We have been named as a defendant in three lawsuits in
    connection with our proposed merger with Bronco Drilling, Inc.
    We do not believe that the suits have any merit.



    28



Table of Contents


    We are involved in various other legal proceedings, including
    labor contract litigation, in the ordinary course of business.
    The legal proceedings are at different stages; however, we
    believe that the likelihood of material loss relating to any
    such legal proceedings is remote.

 







ITEM 4.  


SUBMISSION
    OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS



 

    None


 

PART II


 







ITEM 5.  


MARKET
    FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER
    MATTERS.



 

MARKET
    PRICE INFORMATION

 

    Our common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange under
    the symbol “ALY”. Prior to March 22, 2007, our
    common stock was traded on the American Stock Exchange. The
    following table sets forth, for periods prior to March 22,
    2007, high and low sales prices from our common stock, as
    reported on the American Stock Exchange and for periods since
    March 22, 2007, high and low sale prices of our common
    stock reported on the New York Stock Exchange.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  





Calendar Quarter



 


High


 


 


Low


 



 





2006



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    First Quarter



 


    $


    18.50


 


 


    $


    12.46


 





    Second Quarter



 


 


    17.62


 


 


 


    10.85


 





    Third Quarter



 


 


    19.33


 


 


 


    9.80


 





    Fourth Quarter



 


 


    25.55


 


 


 


    12.15


 





2007



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    First Quarter



 


    $


    23.61


 


 


    $


    14.10


 





    Second Quarter



 


 


    24.39


 


 


 


    15.83


 





    Third Quarter



 


 


    28.10


 


 


 


    18.35


 





    Fourth Quarter



 


 


    19.49


 


 


 


    14.09


 





 

Holders

 

    As of February 29, 2008, there were approximately 1,275
    holders of record of our common stock. On February 29,
    2008, the closing price for our common stock reported on the New
    York Stock Exchange was $12.62 per share.

 

Dividends

 

    No dividends were declared or paid during the past three years,
    and no dividends are anticipated to be declared or paid in the
    foreseeable future. Our credit facilities and the indentures
    governing our senior notes restrict our ability to pay dividends
    on our common stock.



    29



Table of Contents


EQUITY
    COMPENSATION PLAN INFORMATION

 

    The following table provides information as of December 31,
    2007 with respect to the shares of our common stock that may be
    issued under our existing equity compensation plans.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Number of



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Securities to be



 


 


Weighted



 


 


 


 




 


 


Issued Upon



 


 


Average Exercise



 


 


Number of Securities



 




 


 


Exercise of



 


 


Price of



 


 


Remaining Available



 




 


 


Outstanding



 


 


Outstanding



 


 


for Future Issuance



 




 


 


Options, Warrants



 


 


Options, Warrants



 


 


Under Equity



 





Plan Category



 


And Rights


 


 


and Rights


 


 


Compensation Plans


 



 





    Equity compensation plans approved by security holders



 


 


    1,696,763


 


 


    $


    10.76


 


 


 


    527,131


 





    Equity compensation plans not approved by security holders



 


 


    4,000


 


 


    $


    13.75


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


 


    1,700,763


 


 


    $


    10.77


 


 


 


    527,131


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Equity
    Compensation Plans Not Approved By Security Holders

 

    These plans comprise the following:

 

    In 1999 and 2000, the Board compensated former and continuing
    Board members who had served from 1989 to March 31, 1999
    without compensation by issuing promissory notes totaling
    $325,000 and by granting stock options to these same
    individuals. Options to purchase 4,800 shares of common
    stock were granted with an exercise price of $13.75. These
    options vested immediately and expire in March 2010. As of
    December 31, 2007, 4,000 of these options remain
    outstanding.

 

    In connection with the private placement in April 2004, we
    issued warrants for the purchase of 800,000 shares of our
    common stock at an exercise price of $2.50 per share. A total of
    486,557 of these warrants were exercised in 2005 and the
    remaining warrants were exercised in 2006. Warrants for
    4,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $4.65 were also issued in May 2004 and were exercised in January
    2007.



    30



Table of Contents


PERFORMANCE
    GRAPH

 

    Set forth below is a line graph comparing the annual percentage
    change in the cumulative return to the stockholders of our
    common stock with the cumulative return of the Russell 2000 and
    the CoreData Services Oil and Gas Equipment and Services Index
    for the period commencing January 1, 2002 and ending on
    December 31, 2007. Our common stock was a component of the
    Russell 2000 during the year ended December 31, 2007. The
    CoreData Services Oil and Gas Equipment and Services Index is an
    index of approximately 75 oil and gas equipment and services
    providers. The information contained in the performance graph
    shall not be deemed to be “soliciting material” or to
    be “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be
    incorporated by reference into any future filing under the
    Securities Act or Exchange Act, except to the extent that we
    specifically incorporate it by reference into such filing.

 

    The graph assumes that $100 was invested on January 1, 2002
    in our common stock and in each index, and that all dividends
    were reinvested. No dividends have been declared or paid on our
    common stock. Stockholder returns over the indicated period
    should not be considered indicative of future shareholder
    returns.

 



 

COMPARISON
    OF CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN
    OF ONE OR MORE COMPANIES, PEER GROUPS, INDUSTRY INDEXES
    AND/OR BROAD MARKETS

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Fiscal Year Ending




  Company/Index/Market


 


12/31/2002


 


12/31/2003


 


12/31/2004


 


12/30/2005


 


12/29/2006


 


12/31/2007





Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.



 


 


100.00


 


 


 


101.96


 


 


 


192.16


 


 


 


489.02


 


 


 


903.53


 


 


 


578.43


 




 





Oil & Gas Equipment/Svcs



 


 


100.00


 


 


 


121.99


 


 


 


167.42


 


 


 


253.03


 


 


 


298.70


 


 


 


425.38


 




 





Russell 2000 Index



 


 


100.00


 


 


 


145.37


 


 


 


170.81


 


 


 


176.48


 


 


 


206.61


 


 


 


196.40


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    31



Table of Contents








ITEM 6.  


SELECTED
    FINANCIAL DATA.



 

    The following selected historical financial information for each
    of the five years ended December 31, 2007, has been derived
    from our audited consolidated financial statements and related
    notes. Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior
    year’s selected financial data to conform with the current
    period presentation. This information is only a summary and
    should be read in conjunction with material contained in
    “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
    Condition and Results of Operations,” which includes a
    discussion of factors materially affecting the comparability of
    the information presented, and in conjunction with our financial
    statements included elsewhere herein. As discussed in
    Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
    Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” we have
    during the past five years effected a number of business
    combinations and other transactions that materially affect the
    comparability of the information set forth below (in thousands,
    except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Statement of Operations Data



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Revenues



 


    $


    570,967


 


 


    $


    310,964


 


 


    $


    108,022


 


 


    $


    49,307


 


 


    $


    33,278


 





    Income from operations



 


    $


    124,782


 


 


    $


    67,730


 


 


    $


    13,518


 


 


    $


    4,291


 


 


    $


    2,981


 





    Net income from continuing operations



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    888


 


 


    $


    2,927


 





    Net income attributed to common stockholders



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 


 


    $


    764


 


 


    $


    2,271


 





    Per Share Data:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income from continuing operations per common share:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


    $


    1.48


 


 


    $


    1.73


 


 


    $


    0.48


 


 


    $


    0.10


 


 


    $


    0.58


 





    Diluted



 


    $


    1.45


 


 


    $


    1.66


 


 


    $


    0.44


 


 


    $


    0.09


 


 


    $


    0.50


 





    Weighted average number of common shares outstanding:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


 


    34,158


 


 


 


    20,548


 


 


 


    14,832


 


 


 


    7,930


 


 


 


    3,927


 





    Diluted



 


 


    34,701


 


 


 


    21,410


 


 


 


    16,238


 


 


 


    9,510


 


 


 


    5,850


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


As of December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


2004


 


 


2003


 



 





Balance Sheet Data



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets



 


    $


    1,053,585


 


 


    $


    908,326


 


 


    $


    137,355


 


 


    $


    80,192


 


 


    $


    53,662


 





    Long-term debt classified as:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Current



 


    $


    6,434


 


 


    $


    6,999


 


 


    $


    5,632


 


 


    $


    5,541


 


 


    $


    3,992


 





    Long-term



 


    $


    508,300


 


 


    $


    561,446


 


 


    $


    54,937


 


 


    $


    24,932


 


 


    $


    28,241


 





    Redeemable convertible Preferred stock



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    4,171


 





    Stockholders’ equity



 


    $


    414,329


 


 


    $


    253,933


 


 


    $


    60,875


 


 


    $


    35,109


 


 


    $


    4,541


 





    Book value per share



 


    $


    11.80


 


 


    $


    8.99


 


 


    $


    3.61


 


 


    $


    2.58


 


 


    $


    1.30


 





 







ITEM 7.  


MANAGEMENT’S
    DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
    OPERATIONS



 

The following discussion and analysis should be read in
    conjunction with our selected historical financial data and our
    accompanying financial statements and the notes to those
    financial statements included elsewhere in this document. The
    following discussion contains forward-looking statements within
    the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
    1995 that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual
    results could differ materially from those anticipated in these
    forward-looking statements as a result of risks and
    uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those discussed
    under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”



    32



Table of Contents


Overview
    of Our Business

 

    We are a multi-faceted oilfield services company that provides
    services and equipment to oil and natural gas exploration and
    production companies throughout the United States, including
    Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi,
    Wyoming, Arkansas, West Virginia, offshore in the Gulf of
    Mexico, and internationally, primarily in Argentina and Mexico.
    We operate in six sectors of the oil and natural gas service
    industry: Rental Services; International Drilling; Directional
    Drilling; Tubular Services; Underbalanced Drilling and
    Production Services.

 

    We derive operating revenues from rates per job that we charge
    for the labor and equipment required to provide a service and
    rates per day for equipment and tools that we rent to our
    customers. The price we charge for our services depends upon
    several factors, including the level of oil and natural gas
    drilling activity and the competitive environment in the
    particular geographic regions in which we operate. Contracts are
    awarded based on the price, quality of service and equipment,
    and the general reputation and experience of our personnel. The
    demand for drilling services has historically been volatile and
    is affected by the capital expenditures of oil and natural gas
    exploration and development companies, which can fluctuate based
    upon the prices of oil and natural gas or the expectation for
    the prices of oil and natural gas.

 

    The number of working drilling rigs, typically referred to as
    the “rig count,” is an important indicator of activity
    levels in the oil and natural gas industry. The rig count in the
    United States increased from 862 as of December 31, 2002 to
    1,763 as of February 29, 2008, according to the Baker
    Hughes rig count. Furthermore, directional and horizontal rig
    counts increased from 283 as of December 31, 2002 to 817 as
    of February 29, 2008, which accounted for 33% and 46% of
    the total U.S. rig count, respectively. The offshore Gulf
    of Mexico rig count, however, decreased to 58 rigs at
    February 29, 2008 from 90 rigs one year earlier. We believe
    this is due to the relocation of rigs to international markets
    as a result of the high oil prices.

 

    Our cost of revenues represents all direct and indirect costs
    associated with the operation and maintenance of our equipment.
    The principal elements of these costs are direct and indirect
    labor and benefits, repairs and maintenance of our equipment,
    insurance, equipment rentals, fuel and depreciation. Operating
    expenses do not fluctuate in direct proportion to changes in
    revenues because, among other factors, we have a fixed base of
    inventory of equipment and facilities to support our operations,
    and in periods of low drilling activity we may also seek to
    preserve labor continuity to market our services and maintain
    our equipment.

 

Results
    of Operations

 

    In April 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Delta
    and, in May 2005, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Capcoil. We report the operations of Downhole and Capcoil in our
    Production Services segment and the operations of Safco and
    Delta in our Rental Services segment. In July 2005, we acquired
    the 45% interest of M-I in our Underbalanced Drilling
    subsidiary, AirComp, making us the 100% owner of AirComp. In
    addition, in July 2005, we acquired the underbalanced drilling
    assets of W. T. On August 1, 2005, we acquired all of the
    outstanding capital stock of Target. We included Target results
    in our Directional Drilling segment because Target’s
    measurement while drilling equipment is utilized in that
    segment. On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and
    tubing service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. We
    consolidated the results of these acquisitions from the day they
    were acquired.

 

    In January 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Specialty and in December 2006, we acquired substantially all of
    the assets of OGR. We report the operations of Specialty and OGR
    in our Rental Services segment. In April 2006, we acquired all
    of the outstanding stock of Rogers. We report the operations of
    Rogers in our Tubular Services segment. In August 2006, we
    acquired all of the outstanding stock of DLS and in December
    2006, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Tanus. We
    report the operations of DLS and Tanus in our International
    Drilling segment. In October 2006, we acquired all of the
    outstanding stock of Petro Rentals. We report the operations of
    Petro Rentals in our Production Services segment. We
    consolidated the results of these acquisitions from the day they
    were acquired.

 

    In June 2007, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Coker
    and in July 2007, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of
    Diggar and in November 2007, we acquired substantially all of
    the assets of Diamondback. We report the operations of Coker,
    Diggar and Diamondback in our Directional Drilling segment. In
    October 2007, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Rebel.
    We report the operations of



    33



Table of Contents


    Rebel in our Tubular Services segment. We consolidated the
    results of these acquisitions from the day they were acquired.

 

    The foregoing acquisitions affect the comparability from period
    to period of our historical results, and our historical results
    may not be indicative of our future results.

 

Comparison
    of Years Ended December 31, 2007 and December 31,
    2006

 

    Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2007 were
    $571.0 million, an increase of 83.6% compared to
    $311.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006.
    Revenues increased in all of our business segments due
    principally to the acquisitions completed during the two year
    period ended December 31, 2007, the investment in new
    equipment and the opening of new operating locations. The most
    significant increase in revenues was due to the acquisition of
    DLS on August 14, 2006 which established our International
    Drilling segment. Revenues also increased significantly at our
    Rental Services segment due to the acquisition of the OGR assets
    on December 18, 2006. Our Directional Drilling segment
    revenues increased in the 2007 period compared to the 2006
    period due to acquisitions completed in the third and fourth
    quarters of 2007 which added downhole motors,
    measurement-while-drilling, or MWD, tools, and directional
    drilling personnel resulting in increased capacity and increased
    market penetration. Revenues increased at our Underbalanced
    Drilling segment due to the purchase of additional equipment,
    principally new compressor packages, and expansion of operations
    into new geographic regions.

 

    Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2007
    increased 69.9% to $178.6 million, or 31.3% of revenues,
    compared to $105.1 million, or 33.8%, of revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in gross profit
    is due to the increase in revenues in all of our business
    segments. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of
    revenues is primarily due to the 151.3% increase in depreciation
    expense to $50.9 million in 2007 from $20.3 million in
    2006. The increase in depreciation expense is due to the
    acquisition of the OGR assets, the acquisition of DLS and our
    capital expenditures. Our cost of revenues consists principally
    of our labor costs and benefits, equipment rentals, maintenance
    and repairs of our equipment, depreciation, insurance and fuel.
    Because many of our costs are fixed, our gross profit as a
    percentage of revenues is generally affected by our level of
    revenues.

 

    General and administrative expense was $58.6 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to
    $35.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006.
    General and administrative expense increased due to the
    acquisitions, and the hiring of additional sales, operations,
    accounting and administrative personnel. As a percentage of
    revenues, general and administrative expenses were 10.3% in 2007
    compared to 11.4% in 2006. General and administrative expense
    includes share-based compensation expense of $4.7 million
    in 2007 and $3.0 million in 2006.

 

    On June 29, 2007, we sold our capillary tubing assets that
    were part of our Production Services segment. The total
    consideration was approximately $16.3 million in cash. We
    recognized a gain of $8.9 million related to the sale of
    these assets.

 

    Amortization expense was $4.1 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2007 compared to $1.9 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in amortization
    expense is due to the amortization of intangible assets in
    connection with our acquisitions.

 

    Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2007
    totaled $124.8 million, an 84.2% increase over the
    $67.7 million in income from operations for the year ended
    December 31, 2006, reflecting the increase in our revenues
    and gross profit, offset in part by increased general and
    administrative expense and amortization expense. Our income from
    operations as a percentage of revenues increased slightly to
    21.9% in 2007 from 21.8% in 2006. Income from operations in the
    2007 period includes an $8.9 million gain from the sale of
    our capillary tubing assets in the second quarter of 2007.

 

    Our net interest expense was $46.3 million for the year
    ended December 31, 2007, compared to $20.3 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2006. Interest expense
    increased in 2007 due to our increased debt. In August 2006 we
    issued $95.0 million of senior notes bearing interest at
    9.0% to fund a portion of the acquisition of DLS. In January
    2007 we issued $250.0 million of senior notes bearing
    interest at 8.5% to pay off, in part, the $300.0 million
    bridge loan utilized to complete the OGR acquisition and for
    working capital. This bridge loan was repaid on January 29,
    2007. The average interest rate on the bridge loan was



    34



Table of Contents


    approximately 10.6%. Interest expense for 2007 includes the
    write-off of deferred financing fees of $1.2 million
    related to the repayment of the bridge loan. Interest expense
    includes amortization expense of deferred financing costs of
    $1.9 million and $1.5 million for 2007 and 2006,
    respectively.

 

    Our provision for income taxes for the year ended
    December 31, 2007 was $28.8 million, or 36.4% of our
    net income before income taxes, compared to $11.4 million,
    or 24.3% of our net income before income taxes for 2006. The
    increase in our provision for income taxes is attributable to
    the increase in our operating income and a higher effective tax
    rate. The effective tax rate in 2006 was favorably impacted by
    the reversal of our valuation allowance on our deferred tax
    assets. The valuation allowance was reversed due to operating
    results that allowed for the realization of our deferred tax
    assets.

 

    We had net income attributed to common stockholders of
    $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, an
    increase of 41.6%, compared to net income attributed to common
    stockholders of $35.6 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006.

 

    The following table compares revenues and income from operations
    for each of our business segments for the years ended
    December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006. Income from
    operations consists of our revenues less cost of revenues,
    general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and
    amortization:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Revenues


 


 


Income (Loss) from Operations


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


Change


 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


Change


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    121,186


 


 


    $


    51,521


 


 


    $


    69,665


 


 


    $


    49,139


 


 


    $


    26,293


 


 


    $


    22,846


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    215,795


 


 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    146,305


 


 


 


    38,839


 


 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    26,606


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    96,080


 


 


 


    76,471


 


 


 


    19,609


 


 


 


    18,848


 


 


 


    17,666


 


 


 


    1,182


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    53,524


 


 


 


    50,887


 


 


 


    2,637


 


 


 


    10,744


 


 


 


    12,544


 


 


 


    (1,800


    )





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    50,959


 


 


 


    43,045


 


 


 


    7,914


 


 


 


    13,091


 


 


 


    10,810


 


 


 


    2,281


 





    Production Services



 


 


    33,423


 


 


 


    19,550


 


 


 


    13,873


 


 


 


    10,535


 


 


 


    2,137


 


 


 


    8,398


 





    General Corporate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (16,414


    )


 


 


    (13,953


    )


 


 


    (2,461


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


    $


    570,967


 


 


    $


    310,964


 


 


    $


    260,003


 


 


    $


    124,782


 


 


    $


    67,730


 


 


    $


    57,052


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Rental Services.  Our Rental Services revenues
    were $121.2 million for the year ended December 31,
    2007, an increase of 135.2% from the $51.5 million in
    revenues for the year ended December 31, 2006. Income from
    operations increased 86.9% to $49.1 million in 2007
    compared to $26.3 million in 2006. The increase in revenue
    and operating income is primarily attributable to the
    acquisition of the OGR assets in December 2006. Income from
    operations as a percentage of revenues decreased to 40.5% for
    2007 compared to 51.0% for the prior year as a result of higher
    depreciation expense associated with the OGR acquisition and
    capital expenditures. Rental Services revenues and operating
    income was impacted by a more competitive market environment due
    to the decreased U.S. Gulf of Mexico drilling activity in
    the last half of 2007 due to the hurricane season and the
    departure of drilling rigs in favor of the international markets.

 

International Drilling.  On August 14,
    2006, we acquired DLS which established our International
    Drilling segment. Our international drilling revenues were
    $215.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007,
    an increase from the $69.5 million in revenues for the year
    ended December 31, 2006. Income from operations increased
    to $38.8 million in 2007 compared to $12.2 million in
    2006. Income from operations as percentage of revenue increased
    to 18.0% for 2007 compared to 17.6% for 2006. During 2007 we
    placed orders for 16 service rigs (workover rigs and pulling
    rigs) and four drilling rigs. Four of the service rigs were
    delivered in the fourth quarter of 2007. We expect all the rigs
    to be placed in service during the first three quarters of 2008.

 

Directional Drilling.  Revenues for the year
    ended December 31, 2007 for our Directional Drilling
    segment were $96.1 million, an increase of 25.6% from the
    $76.5 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2006. The increase in revenues is due to the
    purchase of additional MWD tools and the benefit of acquisitions
    completed in the last half of 2007 which added downhole motors,
    MWDs, and directional drillers. The additional equipment and
    personnel enabled us to strengthen our presence in new
    geographic markets and increase our market penetration. Income
    from operations increased 6.7% to $18.8 million for



    35



Table of Contents


    2007 from $17.7 million for 2006. Income from operations as
    a percentage of revenues decreased to 19.6% for 2007 compared to
    23.1% for the prior year. The decrease in our operating margin a
    percentage of revenues is due to increased expenses for downhole
    motor rentals and repairs, experienced primarily in the first
    three quarters of 2007 prior to the recent additions to our
    downhole motor fleet, increased personnel costs and increased
    depreciation expense.

 

Tubular Services.  Revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2007 for the Tubular Services segment were
    $53.5 million, an increase of 5.2% from the
    $50.9 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2006. Revenues from domestic operations
    increased to $45.6 million in 2007 from $44.4 million
    in 2006 as a result of the investment in new equipment and the
    acquisition of Rogers in April 2006. Revenues from Mexican
    operations increased to $7.9 million in 2007 from
    $6.5 million in 2006. Income from operations decreased
    14.3% to $10.7 million in 2007 from $12.5 million in
    2006. Income from operations as a percentage of revenues
    decreased to 20.1% for 2007 compared to 24.7% for the prior
    year. The results of our Tubular Services segment were impacted
    by an increasingly competitive environment domestically for
    casing and tubing services, exacerbated by the decline in
    drilling activity in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico in the last
    half of 2007, and decreased sales of power tongs in 2007
    compared to 2006. While revenues from Mexican operations
    increased 21.5% in 2007 compared to 2006, they were impacted in
    the fourth quarter of 2007, by severe weather and flooding in
    Mexico.

 

Underbalanced Drilling.  Our Underbalanced
    Drilling revenues were $51.0 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2007, an increase of 18.4% compared to
    $43.0 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2006. Income from operations increased 21.1%
    to $13.1 million in 2007 compared to income from operations
    of $10.8 million in 2006. Income from operations as a
    percentage of revenues increased slightly to 25.7% in 2007 from
    25.1% in 2006. Our Underbalanced Drilling revenues and operating
    income for the 2007 period increased compared to the 2006 period
    due in part to our investment in additional equipment,
    principally new compressors and new “foam” units.
    During 2007 Underbalanced Drilling was affected by a decrease in
    drilling activity in certain geographic areas by some of our
    customers, offset by an increased market presence and growth in
    drilling activity in other, more attractive geographic areas.

 

Production Services Segment.  Our Production
    Services revenues were $33.4 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2007, compared to $19.6 million in
    revenues for the year ended December 31, 2006. Income from
    operations was $10.5 million in 2007 compared to income
    from operations of $2.1 million in 2006. Revenues for 2007
    increased compared to 2006 due primarily to our acquisition of
    Petro Rentals on October 17, 2006, the addition of two coil
    tubing units in the fourth quarter of 2006, one unit in the
    first quarter of 2007 and one additional unit delivered at the
    end of the second quarter of 2007, offset in part by the sale of
    our capillary tubing assets in June 2007. The increase in income
    from operations can be attributed to an $8.9 million gain
    on sale of our capillary tubing assets. During 2007 our
    Production Services segment experienced delays in the delivery
    and activation of new coil tubing units. As a result, we
    experienced low utilization for our coil tubing units and
    increases in personnel expenses, including increased lodging,
    relocation and training expenses for the crews without the
    benefit of corresponding increases in revenues.

 

Comparison
    of Years Ended December 31, 2006 and December 31,
    2005

 

    Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2006 was
    $311.0 million, an increase of 187.9% compared to
    $108.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2005.
    Revenues increased in all of our business segments due to the
    successful integration of acquisitions completed in the third
    quarter of 2005 and during 2006, the investment in new
    equipment, improved pricing for our services, the addition of
    operations and sales personnel and the opening of new operations
    offices. Revenues increased most significantly due to the
    acquisition of DLS on August 14, 2006 which expanded our
    operations to a sixth operating segment, International Drilling.
    Revenues also increased significantly at our Rental Services
    segment due to the acquisition of Specialty effective
    January 1, 2006. Our Tubular Services segment also had a
    substantial increase in revenue, primarily due to the
    acquisitions of the casing and tubing assets of Patterson
    Services, Inc. on September 1, 2005, and the acquisition of
    Rogers as of April 1, 2006, along with the investment in
    additional equipment, improved market conditions and increased
    market penetration for our services in South Texas, East Texas,
    Louisiana and the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. Revenues increased
    at our Underbalanced Drilling segment due to the purchase of
    additional equipment and improved pricing for our services. Our
    Directional Drilling segment revenues



    36



Table of Contents


    increased in the 2006 period compared to the 2005 period due to
    improved pricing for directional drilling services, the August
    2005 acquisition of Target which provides MWD tools and the
    purchase of additional down-hole motors and MWDs which increased
    our capacity and market presence.

 

    Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2006
    increased 243.8% to $105.1 million, or 33.8% of revenues,
    compared to $30.6 million, or 28.3%, of revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in gross profit
    is due to the increase in revenues in all of our business
    segments. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of
    revenues is primarily due to the acquisition of Specialty as of
    January 1, 2006, in the high margin rental tool business,
    the improved pricing for our services generally and the
    investments in new capital equipment. Also contributing to our
    improved gross profit margin was the acquisition of Target, the
    purchase of additional MWD’s and the acquisition of Rogers.
    The increase in gross profit was partially offset by an increase
    in depreciation expense of 315.7% to $20.3 million compared
    to $4.9 million for 2005. The increase is due to additional
    depreciable assets resulting from the acquisitions and capital
    expenditures. Our cost of revenues consists principally of our
    labor costs and benefits, equipment rentals, maintenance and
    repairs of our equipment, depreciation, insurance and fuel.
    Because many of our costs are fixed, our gross profit as a
    percentage of revenues is generally affected by our level of
    revenues.

 

    General and administrative expense was $35.5 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to
    $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2005.
    General and administrative expense increased due to additional
    expenses associated with the acquisitions, and the hiring of
    additional sales, operations and administrative personnel.
    General and administrative expense also increased because of
    increased accounting and consulting fees and other expenses in
    connection with initiatives to strengthen our internal control
    processes, costs related to Sarbanes Oxley compliance efforts
    and increased corporate accounting and administrative staff. As
    a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses
    were 11.4% in 2006 compared to 14.4% in 2005.

 

    We adopted SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payment,
    effective January 1, 2006. This statement requires all
    share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee
    stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements
    based on their grant-date fair values. We adopted
    SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective
    transition method, utilizing the Black-Scholes option pricing
    model for the calculation of the fair value of our employee
    stock options. Under the modified prospective method, we record
    compensation cost related to unvested stock awards as of
    December 31, 2005 by recognizing the unamortized grant date
    fair value of these awards over the remaining vesting periods of
    those awards with no change in historical reported earnings.
    Therefore, we recorded an expense of $3.4 million related
    to stock awards for the year ended December 31, 2006 of
    which $3.0 million was recorded in general and
    administrative expense with the balance being recorded as a
    direct cost. Prior to January 1, 2006, we accounted for our
    stock-based compensation using Accounting Principle Board
    Opinion No. 25, or APB No. 25. Under APB No. 25,
    compensation expense is recognized for stock options with an
    exercise price that is less than the market price on the grant
    date of the option. Accordingly, no compensation cost was
    recognized under APB No. 25.

 

    Amortization expense was $1.9 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 compared to $1.5 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in amortization
    expense is due to the amortization of intangible assets in
    connection with our acquisitions.

 

    Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2006
    totaled $67.7 million, a 401.0% increase over the
    $13.5 million in income from operations for the year ended
    December 31, 2005, reflecting the increase in our revenues
    and gross profit, offset in part by increased general and
    administrative expenses. Our income from operations as a
    percentage of revenues increased to 21.8% in 2006 from 12.5% in
    2005 due to the increase in our gross margin which offset the
    increases in amortization expense and general and administrative
    expenses.

 

    Our net interest expense was $20.3 million for the year
    ended December 31, 2006, compared to $4.7 million for
    the year ended December 31, 2005. Interest expense
    increased in 2006 due to our increased debt. In January of 2006
    we issued $160.0 million of senior notes bearing interest
    at 9.0% to fund the acquisition of Specialty, pay off other
    outstanding debt and for working capital. In August 2006 we
    issued an additional $95.0 million of senior notes bearing
    interest at 9.0% to fund a portion of the acquisition of DLS. On
    December 18, 2006, we borrowed $300.0 million in a
    senior unsecured bridge loan to fund the acquisition



    37



Table of Contents


    of OGR. The average interest rate on the bridge loan was
    approximately 10.6%. Interest expense for 2006 includes the
    write-off of $453,000 related to financing fees on the bridge
    loan. This bridge loan was repaid on January 29, 2007 and
    the remaining $1.2 million of financing fees were written
    off in 2007. In the third quarter of 2005, we incurred debt
    retirement expense of $1.1 million related to the
    refinancing of our debt. This amount includes prepayment
    penalties and the write-off of deferred financing fees from a
    previous financing.

 

    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 was $0 compared to $488,000 for the
    corresponding period in 2005 due to the our acquisition of the
    minority interest at AirComp on July 11, 2005.

 

    Our provision for income taxes for the year ended
    December 31, 2006 was $11.4 million, or 24.3% of our
    net income before income taxes, compared to $1.3 million,
    or 15.8% of our net income before income taxes for 2005. The
    increase in our provision for income taxes is attributable to
    the significant increase in our operating income which resulted
    in the utilization of our deferred tax assets including our net
    operating losses, and the increase in percentage of income taxes
    to net income before income taxes attributable to our operations
    in Argentina which are taxed at 35.0%.

 

    We had net income attributed to common stockholders of
    $35.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, an
    increase of 396.5%, compared to net income attributed to common
    stockholders of $7.2 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2005.

 

    The following table compares revenues and income from operations
    for each of our business segments for the years ended
    December 31, 2006 and December 31, 2005. Income from
    operations consists of our revenues less cost of revenues,
    general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and
    amortization:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Revenues


 


 


Income (Loss) from Operations


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


Change


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 


 


Change


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


(In thousands)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    51,521


 


 


    $


    5,059


 


 


    $


    46,462


 


 


    $


    26,293


 


 


    $


    1,300


 


 


    $


    24,993


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    12,233


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    76,471


 


 


 


    46,579


 


 


 


    29,892


 


 


 


    17,666


 


 


 


    7,389


 


 


 


    10,277


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    50,887


 


 


 


    20,932


 


 


 


    29,955


 


 


 


    12,544


 


 


 


    4,994


 


 


 


    7,550


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    43,045


 


 


 


    25,662


 


 


 


    17,383


 


 


 


    10,810


 


 


 


    5,612


 


 


 


    5,198


 





    Production Services



 


 


    19,550


 


 


 


    9,790


 


 


 


    9,760


 


 


 


    2,137


 


 


 


    (99


    )


 


 


    2,236


 





    General Corporate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (13,953


    )


 


 


    (5,678


    )


 


 


    (8,275


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


    $


    310,964


 


 


    $


    108,022


 


 


    $


    202,942


 


 


    $


    67,730


 


 


    $


    13,518


 


 


    $


    54,212


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Rental Services Segment.  Our rental services
    revenues were $51.5 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006, an increase from the $5.1 million
    in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2005. Income
    from operations increased to $26.3 million in 2006 compared
    to $1.3 million in 2005. The increase in revenue and
    operating income is primarily attributable to the acquisition of
    Specialty effective January 1, 2006, improved pricing,
    improved utilization of our inventory of rental equipment and to
    a lesser extent, the acquisition of the OGR assets in December
    2006.

 

International Drilling Segment.  Our
    international drilling revenues were $69.5 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2006, and our income from
    operations was $12.2 million. This segment of our
    operations was created with the acquisition of DLS in August of
    2006.

 

Directional Drilling Segment.  Revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2006 for our Directional Drilling
    segment were $76.5 million, an increase of 64.2% from the
    $46.6 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005. Income from operations increased 139.1%
    to $17.7 million for 2006 from $7.4 million for 2005.
    The improved results for this segment are due to the increase in
    drilling activity in the Texas and Gulf Coast areas, improved
    pricing, the acquisition of Target as of August 1, 2005 and
    the purchase of an additional six MWDs. Our increased operating
    expenses as a result of the addition of operations and personnel
    were more than offset by the growth in revenues and improved
    pricing for our services



    38



Table of Contents


Tubular Services Segment.  Revenues for the
    year ended December 31, 2006 for the Tubular Services
    segment were $50.9 million, an increase of 143.1% from the
    $20.9 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005. Revenues from domestic operations
    increased to $44.4 million in 2006 from $14.5 million
    in 2005 as a result of the acquisition of Rogers, the
    acquisition of the casing and tubing assets of Patterson
    Services, Inc. on September 1, 2005 and investment in new
    equipment, all of which resulted in increased market penetration
    for our services in South Texas, East Texas, Louisiana and the
    U.S. Gulf of Mexico. The year ended December 2005 was also
    adversely impacted by hurricane activity in September of 2005.
    Revenues from Mexican operations increased to $6.5 million
    in 2006 from $6.4 million in 2005. Income from operations
    increased 151.2% to $12.5 million in 2006 from
    $5.0 million in 2005. The increase in this segment’s
    operating income is due to increased revenues both domestically
    and in our Mexico operations.

 

Underbalanced Drilling Segment.  Our
    underbalanced drilling revenues were $43.0 million for the
    year ended December 31, 2006, an increase of 67.7% compared
    to $25.7 million in revenues for the year ended
    December 31, 2005. Income from operations increased 92.6%
    to $10.8 million in 2006 compared to income from operations
    of $5.6 million in 2005. Our underbalanced drilling
    revenues and operating income for the 2006 period increased
    compared to the 2005 period due in part to the acquisition of
    the air drilling assets of W. T., our investment in additional
    equipment and improved pricing in West Texas.

 

Production Services Segment.  Our production
    services revenues were $19.6 million for the year ended
    December 31, 2006, compared to $9.8 million in
    revenues for the year ended December 31, 2005. Income from
    operations was $2.1 million in 2006 compared to a loss from
    operations of $99,000 in 2005. The increase in revenue is
    attributable to the acquisition of Petro-Rentals completed in
    October 2006, the acquisition of Capcoil on May 1, 2005 and
    improved utilization and pricing for our services. The increase
    in operating income is primarily related to the operations of
    Petro-Rental and the addition of two coil tubing units in the
    fourth quarter of 2006.

 

Liquidity
    and Capital Resources

 

    Our on-going capital requirements arise primarily from our need
    to service our debt, to acquire and maintain equipment, to fund
    our working capital requirements and to complete acquisitions.
    Our primary sources of liquidity are proceeds from the issuance
    of debt and equity securities and cash flows from operations. We
    had cash and cash equivalents of $43.7 million at
    December 31, 2007 compared to $39.7 million at
    December 31, 2006.

 

Operating
    Activities

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2007, we generated
    $103.5 million in cash from operating activities. Net
    income for the year ended December 31, 2007 was
    $50.4 million. Non-cash additions to net income totaled
    $60.6 million in the 2007 period consisting primarily of
    $55.0 million of depreciation and amortization,
    $4.9 million related to the expensing of stock options as
    required under SFAS No. 123R, $8.0 million of
    deferred income tax, $730,000 for a provision for bad debts and
    $3.2 million of amortization and write-off of deferred
    financing fees, partially offset by $2.3 million of gain
    from the disposition of equipment and a $8.9 million gain
    from the sale of capillary assets.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2007, changes in working
    capital used $7.6 million in cash, principally due to an
    increase of $30.8 million in accounts receivable, an
    increase of $4.5 million in other assets and an increase in
    inventories of $5.4 million, offset by a decrease of
    $8.2 million in other current assets, an increase of
    $10.7 million in accounts payable, an increase of
    $6.0 million in accrued interest, an increase of
    $4.0 million in accrued employee benefits and payroll
    taxes, an increase of $1.5 million in accrued expenses and
    an increase in other long-term liabilities of $2.7 million.
    Our accounts receivables increased at December 31, 2007
    primarily due to the increase in our revenues in 2007. Other
    assets increase primarily due to the contract costs related to
    the deployment of new rigs for our International Drilling
    segment. The decrease in other current assets is principally due
    to the collection of the working capital adjustment from the OGR
    acquisition for approximately $7.1 million in the first
    quarter of 2007. Accrued interest increased at December 31,
    2007 due principally to interest accrued on our 8.5% senior
    notes issued in January 2007 and our 9.0% senior notes
    issued in August 2006 which are both payable semi-annually. Our
    accounts payable, accrued employee benefits and payroll taxes
    and other accrued expenses increased primarily due to the



    39



Table of Contents


    increase in costs due to our growth in revenues and acquisition
    completed in 2007. Other long-term liabilities increased
    primarily due to the deferral of contract revenue related to our
    new rigs being constructed in the International drilling segment.

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2006, we generated
    $53.7 million in cash from operating activities. Net income
    for the year ended December 31, 2006 was
    $35.6 million. Non-cash additions to net income totaled
    $27.6 million in the 2006 period consisting primarily of
    $22.1 million of depreciation and amortization,
    $3.4 million related to the expensing of stock options as
    required under SFAS No. 123R, $2.2 million of
    deferred income tax, $781,000 for a provision for bad debts and
    $1.5 million for amortization of finance fees, including
    the bridge loan fees, partially offset by $2.4 million of
    gain from the disposition of equipment.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2006, changes in working
    capital used $9.9 million in cash, principally due to an
    increase of $23.2 million in accounts receivable, an
    increase of $2.6 million in inventories, a decrease of
    $2.3 million in accounts payable, offset in part by a
    decrease in other current assets of $2.5 million, an
    increase of $11.4 million in accrued interest, an increase
    of $3.4 million in accrued employee benefits and payroll
    taxes and an increase of $872,000 in accrued expenses. Our
    accounts receivables increased at December 31, 2006
    primarily due to the increase in our revenues in 2006. Accrued
    interest increased at December 31, 2006 due principally to
    interest accrued on our 9.0% senior notes, which are
    payable semi-annually. Our accrued employee benefits and payroll
    taxes and other accrued expenses increased primarily due to the
    increase in costs due to our growth in revenues and acquisition
    completed in 2006.

 

    In the year ended December 31, 2005, we generated
    $3.6 million in cash from operating activities. Net income
    for the year ended December 31, 2005 was $7.2 million.
    Non-cash additions to net income totaled $7.4 million in
    the 2005 period consisting primarily of $6.4 million of
    depreciation and amortization, $488,000 of minority interest in
    the income of a subsidiary, $962,000 in amortization and
    write-off of financing fees in conjunction with a refinancing
    and $219,000 for a provision for bad debts, partially offset by
    $669,000 of gain from the disposition of equipment.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, changes in working
    capital used $11.0 million in cash, principally due to an
    increase of $10.7 million in accounts receivable, an
    increase of $3.1 million in inventories, an increase in
    other assets of $936,000, a decrease in other liabilities of
    $266,000 and a decrease of $97,000 in accrued expenses, offset
    in part by a decrease in other current assets of $929,000, an
    increase of $2.4 million in accounts payable, an increase
    of $324,000 in accrued interest and a increase of $443,000 in
    accrued employee benefits and payroll taxes. Our accounts
    receivables increased at December 31, 2005 due primarily to
    the increase in our revenues in 2005. Accounts payable increased
    by $2.4 million at December 31, 2005 due to the
    increase in our cost of sales associated with the increase in
    our revenues and the acquisitions completed in 2005 and 2004.

 

Investing
    Activities

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2007, we used
    $137.1 million in investing activities consisting of four
    acquisitions and our capital expenditures. During the year ended
    December 31, 2007, we completed the following acquisitions
    for a total net cash outlay of $41.0 million, consisting of
    the purchase price and acquisition costs less cash acquired:

 







 
    • 


    In June 2007, we acquired Coker for a purchase price of
    approximately $3.6 million in cash and a promissory note
    for $350,000.


 

 
    • 


    In July 2007, we acquired Diggar for a purchase price of
    approximately $6.7 million in cash, the payment of
    approximately $2.8 million of debt and a promissory note
    for $750,000.


 

 
    • 


    In October 2007, we acquired Rebel for a purchase price of
    approximately $5.0 million in cash, the payment of
    approximately $1.8 million of debt and escrow and
    promissory notes for an aggregate of $500,000.


 

 
    • 


    In November 2007, we acquired substantially all of the assets of
    Diamondback for a purchase price of approximately
    $23.1 million in cash.





    40



Table of Contents

 

    In addition we made capital expenditures of approximately
    $113.2 million during the year ended December 31,
    2007, including $34.9 million to increase our inventory of
    equipment and replace
    “lost-in-hole”
    equipment in the Rental Services segment, $28.9 million to
    purchase, improve and replace equipment in our International
    Drilling segment, $11.2 million to purchase equipment for
    our Directional Drilling segment, $17.4 million to purchase
    and improve equipment in our Underbalanced Drilling segment,
    $9.3 million to purchase and improve our Tubular Services
    equipment and approximately $10.7 million to expand our
    Production Services segment. We received proceeds of
    $16.3 million from the sale of our capillary assets. We
    also received $12.8 million from the sale of assets during
    the year ended December 31, 2007, comprised mostly from
    equipment
    “lost-in-hole”
    from our Rental Services segment ($11.0 million) and our
    Directional Drilling segment ($1.4 million). We also made
    advance payments of $11.5 million on the purchase of new
    drilling and service rigs to be delivered in 2008 for our
    International Drilling segment.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2006, we used
    $559.4 million in investing activities consisting of six
    acquisitions and our capital expenditures. During the year ended
    December 31, 2006, we completed the following acquisitions
    for a total net cash outlay of $526.6 million, consisting
    of the purchase price and acquisition costs less cash acquired:

 







 
    • 


    Effective January 1, 2006, we acquired Specialty for a
    purchase price of approximately $95.3 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    Effective April 1, 2006, we acquired Rogers for a purchase
    price of approximately $11.3 million in cash,
    125,285 shares of our common stock and a promissory note
    for $750,000.


 

 
    • 


    On August 14, 2006, we acquired DLS for a purchase price of
    approximately $93.7 million in cash, 2.5 million
    shares of our common stock and the assumption of
    $9.1 million of indebtedness.


 

 
    • 


    On October 16, 2006, we acquired Petro Rentals for a
    purchase price of approximately $20.2 million in cash,
    246,761 shares of our common stock and the payment of
    approximately $9.6 million of debt.


 

 
    • 


    Effective December 1, 2006, we acquired Tanus for a
    purchase price of $2.5 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    On December 18, 2006, we acquired substantially all of the
    assets of OGR for a purchase price of approximately
    $291.0 million in cash and 3.2 million shares of our
    common stock.



 

    In addition we made capital expenditures of approximately
    $39.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2006,
    including $4.5 million to replace
    “lost-in-hole”
    equipment and to increase our inventory of equipment in the
    Rental Services segment, $5.8 million to purchase, improve
    and replace equipment in our international drilling segment,
    $5.1 million to purchase equipment for our Directional
    Drilling segment, $7.7 million to purchase and improve
    equipment in our Underbalanced Drilling segment,
    $11.0 million to purchase and improve our tubular services
    equipment and approximately $5.3 million to expand our
    Production Services segment. We also received $6.9 million
    from the sale of assets during the year ended December 31,
    2006, comprised mostly from equipment
    “lost-in-hole”
    from our Rental Services segment ($3.8 million) and our
    Directional Drilling segment ($1.8 million).

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, we used
    $53.1 million in investing activities. During the year
    ended December 31, 2005, we completed the following
    acquisitions for a total net cash outlay of $36.9 million,
    consisting of the purchase price and acquisition costs less cash
    acquired:

 







 
    • 


    On April 1, 2005 we acquired Delta for a purchase price of
    approximately $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of
    our common stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000.


 

 
    • 


    On May 1, 2005, we acquired Capcoil for a purchase price of
    approximately $2.7 million in cash, 168,161 shares of
    our common stock and the payment or assumption of approximately
    $1.3 million of debt.


 

 
    • 


    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T. for a purchase price of $6.0 million in cash.


 

 
    • 


    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I it’s 45%
    interest in AirComp and subordinated note in the principal
    amount of $4.8 million issued by AirComp, for which we paid
    M-I $7.1 million in cash and reissued a $4.0 million
    subordinated note.





    41



Table of Contents

 







 
    • 


    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired Target for a purchase
    price of approximately $1.3 million in cash and forgiveness
    of a lease receivable of $592,000.


 

 
    • 


    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for a purchase price
    of approximately $15.6 million.



 

    In addition we made capital expenditures of approximately
    $17.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2005,
    including $2.9 million to purchase equipment for our
    Directional Drilling segment, $7.0 million to purchase and
    improve equipment in our Underbalanced Drilling segment,
    $5.2 million to purchase and improve our tubular services
    equipment and approximately $1.5 million to expand our
    Production Services segment. We also received $1.6 million
    from the sale of assets during the year ended December 31,
    2005, comprised mostly from equipment lost in the hole from our
    Directional Drilling segment ($1.0 million) and our Rental
    Services segment ($408,000).

 

Financing
    Activities

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2007, financing
    activities provided a net of $37.6 million in cash. We
    received $250.0 million in borrowings from the issuance of
    our 8.5% senior notes due 2017. We also received
    $100.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of
    6,000,000 shares of our common stock, $1.7 million on
    the tax benefit of stock compensation plans and
    $3.3 million from the proceeds of warrant and option
    exercises for 882,624 shares of our common stock. The
    proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $309.7 million and to pay $7.8 million in debt
    issuance costs. The repayment of long-term debt consisted
    primarily of the repayment of our $300.0 million bridge
    loan which was used to fund the acquisition of the OGR assets.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2006, financing
    activities provided a net of $543.6 million in cash. We
    received $557.8 million in borrowings under long-term debt
    facilities, consisting primarily of the issuance of
    $255.0 million of our 9.0% senior notes due 2014 and a
    $300.0 million senior unsecured bridge loan. The bridge
    loan, which was repaid on January 29, 2007, was used to
    fund the acquisition of the OGR assets. We also received
    $46.3 million in net proceeds from the issuance of
    3,450,000 shares of our common stock, $6.4 million on
    the tax benefit of options and $6.3 million from the
    proceeds of warrant and option exercises for
    1,851,377 shares of our common stock. The proceeds were
    used to repay long-term debt totaling $54.0 million, repay
    $6.4 million in net borrowings under our revolving lines of
    credit, repay related party debt of $3.0 million and to pay
    $9.9 million in debt issuance costs.

 

    During the year ended December 31, 2005, financing
    activities provided a net of $44.1 million in cash. We
    received $56.3 million in borrowings under long-term debt
    facilities, $15.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance
    of 1,761,034 shares of our common stock, $2.5 million
    in net borrowings under our revolving lines of credit and
    $1.4 million from the proceeds of warrant and option
    exercises for 1,076,154 shares of our common stock. The
    proceeds were used to repay long-term debt totaling
    $28.2 million, repay related party debt of
    $1.5 million and to pay $1.8 million in debt issuance
    costs.

 

    On January 18, 2006 and August 14, 2006, we closed on
    private offerings, to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to
    Rule 144A under the Securities Act, of $160.0 million
    and $95.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior
    notes, respectively. The senior notes are due January 15,
    2014 and bear interest at 9.0%. The proceeds were used to fund
    the acquisitions of Specialty and DLS, to repay existing debt
    and for general corporate purposes. Debt repaid included all
    outstanding balances under our credit agreement, including a
    $42.1 million term loan and $6.4 million in working
    capital advances, a $4.0 million subordinated note issued
    in connection with acquisition of AirComp, approximately
    $3.0 million subordinated note issued in connection with
    the acquisition of Tubular, approximately $548,000 on a real
    estate loan and approximately $350,000 on outstanding equipment
    financing.

 

    On December 18, 2006, we closed on a $300.0 million
    senior unsecured bridge loan. The bridge loan was due
    18 months after closing and had a weighted average interest
    rate of 10.6%. The bridge loan, which was repaid on
    January 29, 2007, was used to fund the acquisition of OGR.

 

    In January 2007, we closed on a private offering, to qualified
    institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the
    Securities Act, of $250.0 million principal amount of
    8.5% senior notes due 2017. The proceeds of the senior
    notes offering, together with a portion of the proceeds of our
    concurrent common stock offering,



    42



Table of Contents


    were used to repay the debt outstanding under our
    $300.0 million bridge loan facility which we incurred to
    finance our acquisition of substantially all the assets of OGR.

 

    On January 18, 2006, we also executed an amended and
    restated credit agreement which provides for a
    $25.0 million revolving line of credit with a maturity of
    January 2010. This agreement contains customary events of
    default and financial covenants and limits our ability to incur
    additional indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay
    dividends or make other distributions, create liens and sell
    assets. Our obligations under the agreement are secured by
    substantially all of our assets excluding the DLS assets, but
    including 2/3 of our shares of DLS. On April 26, 2007, we
    entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement,
    which increased our revolving line of credit to
    $62.0 million, and has a final maturity date of
    April 26, 2012. On December 3, 2007, we entered into a
    First Amendment to Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement,
    which increased our revolving line of credit to
    $90.0 million. The amended and restated credit agreement
    contains customary events of default and financial covenants and
    limits our ability to incur additional indebtedness, make
    capital expenditures, pay dividends or make other distributions,
    create liens and sell assets. Our obligations under the amended
    and restated credit agreement are secured by substantially all
    of our assets located in the United States. At December 31,
    2007 and 2006, no amounts were borrowed on the facility but
    availability is reduced by outstanding letters of credit of
    $8.4 million and $9.7 million, respectively.

 

    As part of our acquisition of DLS, we assumed various bank loans
    with floating interest rates based on LIBOR plus a margin and
    terms ranging from 2 to 5 years. The weighted average
    interest rates on these loans was 6.7% and 7.0% at
    December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The bank loans
    are denominated in U.S. dollars and the outstanding amount
    due as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 was $4.9 million
    and $7.3 million, respectively.

 

    As part of the acquisition of MCA in 2001, we issued a note to
    the sellers of MCA in the original amount of $2.2 million
    accruing interest at a rate of 5.75% per annum. The note was
    reduced to $1.5 million as a result of the settlement of a
    legal action against the sellers in 2003. In March 2005, we
    reached an agreement with the sellers and holders of the note as
    a result of an action brought against us by the sellers. Under
    the terms of the agreement, we paid the holders of the note
    $1.0 million in cash, and agreed to pay an additional
    $350,000 on June 1, 2006, and an additional $150,000 on
    June 1, 2007, in settlement of all claims. At
    December 31, 2007 and 2006 the outstanding amounts due were
    $0 and $150,000, respectively.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Delta, we issued to the
    sellers a note in the amount of $350,000. The note bore interest
    at 2% and the principal and accrued interest was repaid on its
    maturity of April 1, 2006. In connection with the
    acquisition of Rogers, we issued to the seller a note in the
    amount of $750,000. The note bears interest at 5.0% and is due
    April 3, 2009. In connection with the purchase of Coker, we
    issued to the seller a note in the amount of $350,000. The note
    bears interest at 8.25% and is due June 29, 2008. In
    connection with the purchase of Diggar, we issued to the seller
    a note in the amount of $750,000. The note bears interest at
    6.0% and is due July 26, 2008. In connection with the
    purchase of Rebel, we issued to the sellers notes in the amount
    of $500,000. The notes bear interest at 5.0% and are due
    October 23, 2008.

 

    In connection with the purchase of Tubular, we agreed to pay a
    total of $1.2 million to the seller in exchange for a
    non-compete agreement. Monthly payments of $20,576 were due
    under this agreement through January 31, 2007. In
    connection with the purchase of Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc.,
    or Safco, we also agreed to pay a total of $150,000 to the
    sellers in exchange for a non-compete agreement. We were
    required to make annual payments of $50,000 through
    September 30, 2007. In connection with the purchase of
    Capcoil, we agreed to pay a total of $500,000 to two management
    employees in exchange for non-compete agreements. We are
    required to make annual payments of $110,000 through May 2008.
    Total amounts due under these non-compete agreements at
    December 31, 2007 and 2006 were $110,000 and $270,000,
    respectively.

 

    In 2000 we compensated directors, including current directors
    Nederlander and Toboroff, who served on the board of directors
    from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation, by
    issuing promissory notes totaling $325,000. The notes bear
    interest at the rate of 5.0%. At December 31, 2007 and
    2006, the principal and accrued interest on these notes totaled
    approximately $32,000.

 

    We have various rig and equipment financing loans with interest
    rates ranging from 7.8% to 8.7% and terms of 2 to 5 years.
    As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the outstanding balances
    for rig and equipment



    43



Table of Contents


    financing loans were $595,000 and $3.5 million,
    respectively. In January 2006, we prepaid $350,000 of the
    outstanding equipment loans with proceeds from our senior notes
    offering.

 

    In April 2006 and August 2006, we obtained insurance premium
    financings in the amount of $1.9 million and $896,000 with
    fixed interest rates of 5.6% and 6.0%, respectively. Under terms
    of the agreements, amounts outstanding are paid over
    10 month and 11 month repayment schedules. The
    outstanding balance of these notes was approximately
    $1.0 million as of December 31, 2006. In April 2007
    and August 2007, we obtained insurance premium financings in the
    amount of $3.2 million and $1.3 with fixed interest rates
    of 5.9% and 5.7%, respectively. Under terms of the agreements,
    amounts outstanding are paid over 11 month repayment
    schedules. The outstanding balance of these notes was
    approximately $1.7 million as of December 31, 2007.

 

    We also have various capital leases with terms that expire in
    2008. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, amounts outstanding
    under capital leases were $14,000 and $414,000, respectively.

 

    The following table summarizes our obligations and commitments
    to make future payments under our notes payable, operating
    leases, employment contracts and consulting agreements for the
    periods specified as of December 31, 2007.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Payments by Period


 




 


 


 


 


 


Less Than



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Total


 


 


1 Year


 


 


1-3 Years


 


 


3-5 Years


 


 


After 5 Years


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Contractual Obligations



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Long-term debt



 


    $


    514,720


 


 


    $


    6,420


 


 


    $


    2,950


 


 


    $


    350


 


 


    $


    505,000


 





    Capital leases



 


 


    14


 


 


 


    14


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Interest payments on long-term debt



 


 


    334,018


 


 


 


    44,588


 


 


 


    88,577


 


 


 


    88,406


 


 


 


    112,447


 





    Operating leases



 


 


    5,941


 


 


 


    2,618


 


 


 


    2,354


 


 


 


    593


 


 


 


    376


 





    Employment contracts



 


 


    7,511


 


 


 


    3,543


 


 


 


    3,968


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total contractual cash obligations



 


    $


    862,204


 


 


    $


    57,183


 


 


    $


    97,849


 


 


    $


    89,349


 


 


    $


    617,823


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    We have identified capital expenditure projects that will
    require up to approximately $140.0 million in 2008,
    exclusive of any acquisitions, of which $82.7 million is
    committed as of December 31, 2007. We believe that our cash
    generated from operations, cash on hand and cash available under
    our credit facilities will provide sufficient funds for our
    identified projects.

 

    We intend to implement a growth strategy of increasing the scope
    of services through both internal growth and acquisitions. We
    are regularly involved in discussions with a number of potential
    acquisition candidates. We expect to make capital expenditures
    to acquire and to maintain our existing equipment. Our
    performance and cash flow from operations will be determined by
    the demand for our services which in turn are affected by our
    customers’ expenditures for oil and natural gas exploration
    and development and industry perceptions and expectations of
    future oil and natural gas prices in the areas where we operate.
    We will need to refinance our existing debt facilities as they
    become due and provide funds for capital expenditures and
    acquisitions. To effect our expansion plans, we will require
    additional equity or debt financing in excess of our current
    working capital and amounts available under credit facilities.
    There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising
    the additional debt or equity capital or that we can do so on
    terms that will be acceptable to us.

 

Recent
    Developments

 

    On January 23, 2008, we entered into an Agreement and Plan
    of Merger with Bronco Drilling Company, Inc., or Bronco, whereby
    Bronco will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Allis-Chalmers.
    The merger agreement, which was approved by our Board of
    Directors and the Board of Directors of Bronco, provides that
    the Bronco stockholders will receive aggregate merger
    consideration with a value of approximately $437.8 million,
    consisting of (a) $280.0 million in cash and
    (b) shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share,
    having an aggregate value of approximately $157.8 million.
    The number of shares of our common stock to be issued will be
    based on the average closing price of our common stock for the
    ten-trading day period ending



    44



Table of Contents


    two days prior to the closing. Completion of the merger is
    conditioned upon, among other things, adoption of the merger
    agreement by Bronco’s stockholders and approval by our
    stockholders of the issuance of shares of our common stock to be
    used as merger consideration.

 

    In order to finance some or all of the cash component of the
    merger consideration, the repayment of outstanding Bronco debt
    and transaction expenses, we expect to incur debt of up to
    $350.0 million. We intend to obtain up to
    $350.0 million from either (1) a permanent debt
    financing of up to $350.0 million or (2) if the
    permanent debt financing cannot be consummated prior to the
    closing date of the merger, the draw down under a senior
    unsecured bridge loan facility in an aggregate principal amount
    of up to $350.0 million to be arranged by RBC Capital
    Markets Corporation and Goldman Sachs Credit Partners L.P.,
    acting as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners. We
    executed a commitment letter, dated January 28, 2008, with
    Royal Bank of Canada and Goldman Sachs who have each, subject to
    certain conditions, severally committed to provide 50% of the
    loans under the senior unsecured bridge facility to us. This
    commitment for the bridge loan facility will terminate on
    July 31, 2008, if we have not drawn the bridge facility by
    such date and the merger is not consummated by such date. The
    commitment may also terminate prior to July 31, 2008, if
    the merger is abandoned or a material condition to the merger is
    not satisfied or we breach our obligations under the commitment
    letter. We may use the proceeds of the bridge facility to
    finance the cash component of the merger consideration, repay
    outstanding Bronco debt and pay transaction expenses.

 

    On January 29, 2008, Burt A. Adams resigned as our
    President and Chief Operating Officer, effective
    February 28, 2008. Mr. Adams will remain as a member
    of our Board of Directors. On January 29, 2008, Mark C.
    Patterson was elected our Senior Vice-President — Rental
    Services. On January 29, 2008, Terrence P. Keane was
    elected our Senior Vice-President — Oilfield Services.

 

    On January 31, 2008, we entered into an agreement with BCH
    Ltd., or BCH, to invest $40.0 million in cash in BCH in the
    form of a 15% Convertible Subordinated Secured debenture.
    The debenture is convertible, at any time, at our option into
    49% of the common equity of BCH. At the end of two years, we
    have the option to acquire the remaining 51% of BCH from its
    parent, BrazAlta Resources Corp., or BrazAlta, based on an
    independent valuation from a mutually acceptable investment
    bank. BCH is a Canadian-based oilfield services company engaged
    in contract drilling operations exclusively in Brazil.

 

    On February 15, 2008, through our DLS subsidiary in
    Argentina, we entered into a $25.0 million import finance
    facility with a bank. Borrowings under this facility will be
    used to fund a portion of the purchase price of the new drilling
    and service rigs ordered for our international drilling
    operation. The facility is available for borrowings until
    December 31, 2008. Each drawdown shall be repaid over four
    years in equal semi-annual instalments beginning one year after
    each disbursement with the final principal payment due not later
    than March 15, 2013. Interest is payable every six months.
    The import finance facility is unsecured and contains customary
    events of default and financial covenants and limits DLS’
    ability to incur additional indebtedness, make capital
    expenditures, create liens and sell assets.

 

Critical
    Accounting Policies

 

    We have identified the policies below as critical to our
    business operations and the understanding of our results of
    operations. The impact and any associated risks related to these
    policies on our business operations is discussed throughout
    Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
    and Results of Operations where such policies affect our
    reported and expected financial results. For a detailed
    discussion on the application of these and other accounting
    policies, see Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated
    Financial Statements included elsewhere in this document. Our
    preparation of this report requires us to make estimates and
    assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and
    liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at
    the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts
    of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. There can
    be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those
    estimates.

 

Allowance For Doubtful Accounts.  The
    determination of the collectibility of amounts due from our
    customers requires us to use estimates and make judgments
    regarding future events and trends, including monitoring our
    customer payment history and current credit worthiness to
    determine that collectibility is reasonably assured, as well as
    consideration of the overall business climate in which our
    customers operate. Those uncertainties require us to make
    frequent judgments and estimates regarding our customers’
    ability to



    45



Table of Contents


    pay amounts due us in order to determine the appropriate amount
    of valuation allowances required for doubtful accounts.
    Provisions for doubtful accounts are recorded when it becomes
    evident that the customers will not be able to make the required
    payments at either contractual due dates or in the future.

 

Revenue Recognition.  We provide rental
    equipment and drilling services to our customers at per day, or
    daywork, and per job contractual rates and recognize the
    drilling related revenue as the work progresses and when
    collectibility is reasonably assured. Revenue from daywork
    contracts is recognized when it is realized or realizable and
    earned. On daywork contracts, revenue is recognized based on the
    number of days completed at fixed rates stipulated by the
    contract. For certain contracts, we receive lump-sum and other
    fees for equipment and other mobilization costs. Mobilization
    fees and the related costs are deferred and amortized over the
    contract terms when material. The Securities and Exchange
    Commission’s Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104,
    Revenue Recognition in Financial Statements, provides
    guidance on the SEC staff’s views on application of
    generally accepted accounting principles to selected revenue
    recognition issues. Our revenue recognition policy is in
    accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
    SAB No. 104.

 

Impairment Of Long-Lived Assets.  Long-lived
    assets, which include property, plant and equipment, goodwill
    and other intangibles, comprise a significant amount of our
    total assets. We make judgments and estimates in conjunction
    with the carrying value of these assets, including amounts to be
    capitalized, depreciation and amortization methods and useful
    lives. Additionally, the carrying values of these assets are
    reviewed for impairment or whenever events or changes in
    circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be
    recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded in the period in
    which it is determined that the carrying amount is not
    recoverable. This requires us to make long-term forecasts of our
    future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to
    review. These forecasts require assumptions about demand for our
    products and services, future market conditions and
    technological developments. Significant and unanticipated
    changes to these assumptions could require a provision for
    impairment in a future period.

 

Goodwill And Other Intangibles.  As of
    December 31, 2007, we have recorded approximately
    $138.4 million of goodwill and $35.2 million of other
    identifiable intangible assets. We perform purchase price
    allocations to intangible assets when we make a business
    combination. Business combinations and purchase price
    allocations have been consummated for acquisitions in all of our
    reportable segments. The excess of the purchase price after
    allocation of fair values to tangible assets is allocated to
    identifiable intangibles and thereafter to goodwill.
    Subsequently, we perform our initial impairment tests and annual
    impairment tests in accordance with Financial Accounting
    Standards Board No. 141, Business Combinations, and
    Financial Accounting Standards Board No. 142, Goodwill
    and Other Intangible Assets. These initial valuations used
    two approaches to determine the carrying amount of the
    individual reporting units. The first approach is the Discounted
    Cash Flow Method, which focuses on our expected cash flow. In
    applying this approach, the cash flow available for distribution
    is projected for a finite period of years. Cash flow available
    for distribution is defined as the amount of cash that could be
    distributed as a dividend without impairing our future
    profitability or operations. The cash flow available for
    distribution and the terminal value (our value at the end of the
    estimation period) are then discounted to present value to
    derive an indication of value of the business enterprise. This
    valuation method is dependent upon the assumptions made
    regarding future cash flow and cash requirements. The second
    approach is the Guideline Company Method which focuses on
    comparing us to selected reasonably similar publicly traded
    companies. Under this method, valuation multiples are:
    (i) derived from operating data of selected similar
    companies; (ii) evaluated and adjusted based on our
    strengths and weaknesses relative to the selected guideline
    companies; and (iii) applied to our operating data to
    arrive at an indication of value. This valuation method is
    dependent upon the assumption that our value can be evaluated by
    analysis of our earnings and our strengths and weaknesses
    relative to the selected similar companies. Significant and
    unanticipated changes to these assumptions could require a
    provision for impairment in a future period.

 

Income Taxes.  The determination and evaluation
    of our annual income tax provision involves the interpretation
    of tax laws in various jurisdictions in which we operate and
    requires significant judgment and the use of estimates and
    assumptions regarding significant future events such as the
    amount, timing and character of income, deductions and tax
    credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations and our level of
    operations or profitability in each jurisdiction may impact our
    tax liability in any given year. While our annual tax provision
    is based on the information available to us at the time, a
    number of years may elapse before the



    46



Table of Contents


    ultimate tax liabilities in certain tax jurisdictions are
    determined. Current income tax expense reflects an estimate of
    our income tax liability for the current year, withholding
    taxes, changes in tax rates and changes in prior year tax
    estimates as returns are filed. Deferred tax assets and
    liabilities are recognized for the anticipated future tax
    effects of temporary differences between the financial statement
    basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities using the
    enacted tax rates in effect at year end. A valuation allowance
    for deferred tax assets is recorded when it is
    more-likely-than-not that the benefit from the deferred tax
    asset will not be realized. We provide for uncertain tax
    positions pursuant to FASB Interpretation No. 48,
    Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes — an
    Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109.

 

    It is our intention to permanently reinvest all of the
    undistributed earnings of our
    non-U.S. subsidiaries
    in such subsidiaries. Accordingly, we have not provided for
    U.S. deferred taxes on the undistributed earnings of our
    non-U.S. subsidiaries.
    If a distribution is made to us from the undistributed earnings
    of these subsidiaries, we could be required to record additional
    taxes. Because we cannot predict when, if at all, we will make a
    distribution of these undistributed earnings, we are unable to
    make a determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred tax
    liability.

 

Recently
    Issued Accounting Standards

 

    In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157,
    Fair Value Measurements. SFAS No. 157 clarifies
    the principle that fair value should be based on the assumptions
    that market participants would use when pricing an asset or
    liability and establishes a fair value hierarchy that
    prioritizes the information used to develop those assumptions.
    Under the standard, fair value measurements would be separately
    disclosed by level within the fair value hierarchy.
    SFAS No. 157 is effective for financial statements
    issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007,
    and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early
    adoption permitted. Subsequently, the FASB provided for a
    one-year deferral of the provisions of Statement No. 157
    for non-financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or
    disclosed at fair value in the consolidated financial statements
    on a non-recurring basis. We believe that the adoption of
    SFAS No. 157 will not have a material impact on our
    financial position, results of operations or cash flows.

 

    In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141(R),
    Business Combinations. This statement retains the
    fundamental requirements in SFAS No. 141,
    “Business Combinations” that the acquisition method of
    accounting be used for all business combinations and expands the
    same method of accounting to all transactions and other events
    in which one entity obtains control over one or more other
    businesses or assets at the acquisition date and in subsequent
    periods. This statement replaces SFAS No. 141 by
    requiring measurement at the acquisition date of the fair value
    of assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any non-controlling
    interest. Additionally, SFAS No. 141(R) requires that
    acquisition-related costs, including restructuring costs, be
    recognized as expense separately from the acquisition.
    SFAS No. 141(R) applies prospectively to business
    combinations for fiscal years beginning after December 15,
    2008. We will adopt SFAS No. 141(R) beginning
    January 1, 2009 and apply to future acquisitions.

 

    In February 2007, the FASB issued Statement No. 159, The
    Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial
    Liabilities, which permits entities to elect to measure many
    financial instruments and certain other items at fair value.
    Upon adoption of SFAS No. 159, an entity may elect the
    fair value option for eligible items that exist at the adoption
    date. Subsequent to the initial adoption, the election of the
    fair value option should only be made at the initial recognition
    of the asset or liability or upon a re-measurement event that
    gives rise to the new-basis of accounting. All subsequent
    changes in fair value for that instrument are reported in
    earnings. SFAS No. 159 does not affect any existing
    accounting literature that requires certain assets and
    liabilities to be recorded at fair value nor does it eliminate
    disclosure requirements included in other accounting standards.
    SFAS No. 159 is effective as of the beginning of each
    reporting entity’s first fiscal year that begins after
    November 15, 2007. We are currently evaluating the
    provisions of SFAS No. 159 and have not yet determined
    the impact, if any, on our financial statements.

 

    In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 160,
    Non-controlling Interests in Consolidated Financial
    Statements — an amendment of ARB No. 51.
    SFAS No. 160 requires (i) that non-controlling
    (minority) interests be reported as a component of
    shareholders’ equity, (ii) that net income
    attributable to the parent and to the non-controlling interest
    be separately identified in the consolidated statement of
    operations, (iii) that changes in a parent’s ownership
    interest while the parent retains its controlling interest be
    accounted for as



    47



Table of Contents


    equity transactions, (iv) that any retained non-controlling
    equity investment upon the deconsolidation of a subsidiary be
    initially measured at fair value, and (v) that sufficient
    disclosures are provided that clearly identify and distinguish
    between the interests of the parent and the interests of the
    non-controlling owners. SFAS No. 160 is effective for
    annual periods beginning after December 15, 2008 and should
    be applied prospectively. The presentation and disclosure
    requirements of the statement shall be applied retrospectively
    for all periods presented. We believe the adoption of
    SFAS No. 160 will not have a material impact on our
    financial position or results of operations.

 

Off-Balance
    Sheet Arrangements

 

    We have no off balance sheet arrangements, other than normal
    operating leases and employee contracts, that have or are likely
    to have a current or future material effect on our financial
    condition, changes in financial condition, revenues, expenses,
    results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or
    capital resources. We have a $90.0 million revolving line
    of credit with a maturity of January 2010. At December 31,
    2007, no amounts were borrowed on the facility but availability
    is reduced by outstanding letters of credit of
    $8.4 million. We do not guarantee obligations of any
    unconsolidated entities.

 







ITEM 7A.  


QUANTITATIVE
    AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK.



 

    We are exposed to market risk primarily from changes in interest
    rates and foreign currency exchange risks.

 

Interest
    Rate Risk

 

    Fluctuations in the general level of interest rates on our
    current and future fixed and variable rate debt obligations
    expose us to market risk. We are vulnerable to significant
    fluctuations in interest rates on our variable rate debt and on
    any future refinancing of our fixed rate debt and on future debt.

 

    At December 31, 2007, we were exposed to interest rate
    fluctuations on approximately $4.9 million of bank loans
    carrying variable interest rates. A hypothetical one hundred
    basis point increase in interest rates for these notes payable
    would increase our annual interest expense by approximately
    $49,000. Due to the uncertainty of fluctuations in interest
    rates and the specific actions that might be taken by us to
    mitigate the impact of such fluctuations and their possible
    effects, the foregoing sensitivity analysis assumes no changes
    in our financial structure.

 

    We have also been subject to interest rate market risk for
    short-term invested cash and cash equivalents. The principal of
    such invested funds would not be subject to fluctuating value
    because of their highly liquid short-term nature. As of
    December 31, 2007, we had $31.1 million invested in
    short-term maturing investments.

 

Foreign
    Currency Exchange Rate Risk

 

    We have designated the U.S. dollar as the functional
    currency for our operations in international locations as we
    contract with customers, purchase equipment and finance capital
    using the U.S. dollar. Local currency transaction gains and
    losses, arising from remeasurement of certain assets and
    liabilities denominated in local currency, are included in our
    consolidated statements of income. For the years ended
    December 31, 2007 and 2006, we had a net foreign exchange
    loss of $128,000 and $515,000, respectively relating to our DLS
    operations. We conduct business in Mexico through our Mexican
    partner, Matyep. This business exposes us to foreign exchange
    risk. To control this risk, we provide for payment in
    U.S. dollars.



    48



Table of Contents








ITEM 8.  


FINANCIAL
    STATEMENTS.



 

INDEX TO
    FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

 



  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Page


 



 





Management’s Report to the Stockholders of
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. 



 


 


    50


 





Reports of Independent Registered Public
    Accounting Firm



 


 


    51


 





Consolidated Balance Sheet



 


 


    53


 





Consolidated Statement of Operations



 


 


    54


 





Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’
    Equity



 


 


    55


 





Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows



 


 


    56


 





Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements



 


 


    57


 





Supplemental Information to Consolidated
    Financial Statements — Summarized Quarterly Financial
    Data



 


 


    92


 







    49



Table of Contents


 

MANAGEMENT’S
    REPORT TO THE STOCKHOLDERS OF ALLIS-CHALMERS ENERGY
    INC.


 

Management’s
    Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting

 

    As management, we are responsible for establishing and
    maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting
    for Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and its subsidiaries, or
    Allis-Chalmers. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of
    internal control over financial reporting, as required by
    Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, we have
    conducted an assessment, including testing, using the criteria
    in Internal Control-Integral Framework issued by the
    Committee of Sponsoring Organization of the Treadway Commission
    (COSO). Allis-Chalmers’ system of internal control over
    financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance
    regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
    preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
    accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
    United States of America. Because of its inherent limitation,
    internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
    detect misstatements.

 

    Based on our assessment, we have concluded that Allis-Chalmers
    maintained effective internal control over financial reporting
    as of December 31, 2007, based on criteria in Internal
    Control-Integrated Framework issued by the COSO. The
    effectiveness of Allis-Chalmers internal control over financial
    reporting as of December 31, 2007 has been audited by UHY
    LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated
    in their report, which is included herein.

 

Management’s
    Certifications

 

    The certifications of Allis-Chalmers’ Chief Executive
    Officer and Chief Financial Officer required by the
    Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 have been included as
    Exhibits 31 and 32 in Allis-Chalmers’
    Form 10-K.

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.
    

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  





    By:



 


    /s/ Munawar H. Hidayatallah



 


 


 


    By:


 


    /s/ Victor M. Perez





 


 


    Munawar H. Hidayatallah


 


 


 


 


 


    Victor Perez




 


 


    Chief Executive Officer


 


 


 


 


 


    Chief Financial Officer







    50



Table of Contents


 

REPORT OF
    INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM


 

    To the Board of Directors and Stockholders


    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.


    Houston, Texas

 

    We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and subsidiaries (the
    “Company”) as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, and
    the related consolidated statements of operations,
    stockholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three
    years in the period ended December 31, 2007. These
    consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the
    Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an
    opinion on these consolidated financial statements and financial
    statement schedule based on our audits.

 

    We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
    standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
    reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
    free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
    test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
    the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
    accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
    management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
    statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
    reasonable basis for our opinion.

 

    In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above
    present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated
    financial position of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and
    subsidiaries as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, and the
    consolidated results of their operations and their cash flows
    for each of the three years in the period ended
    December 31, 2007, in conformity with accounting principles
    generally accepted in the United States of America. Also, in our
    opinion, the related financial statement schedule, when
    considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken
    as a whole, presents fairly in all material respects the
    information set forth therein.

 

    As discussed in Note 6 to the consolidated financial
    statements, effective January 1, 2007, the Company adopted
    FASB Interpretations No. 48: Accounting for Uncertainty
    in Income Taxes an Interpretation of FASB Statement
    No. 109 and, as discussed in Note 1, effective
    January 1, 2006, the Company adopted Statement of Financial
    Accounting Standards No. 123 (Revised 2004): Share Based
    Payment.

 

    We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States),
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.’s internal control over
    financial reporting as of December 31, 2007, based on
    criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework
    issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
    Treadway Commission (COSO), and our report dated March 6,
    2008 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.

 

    /s/ UHY LLP

 

    Houston, Texas


    March 6, 2008



    51



Table of Contents


REPORT OF
    INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM

 

    The Board of Directors and


    Stockholders of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.:

 

    We have audited Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.’s internal
    control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2007,
    based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated
    Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
    Organizations of the Treadway Commission (the COSO criteria).
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.’s management is responsible for
    maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting,
    and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control
    over financial reporting included in the accompanying
    Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial
    Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the
    Company’s internal control over financial reporting based
    on our audit.

 

    We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting of Oversight Board (United States).
    Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
    obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal
    control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
    respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of
    internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk
    that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the
    design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on
    the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we
    considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our
    audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.

 

    A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a
    process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
    reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
    financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
    generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s
    internal control over financial reporting includes those
    policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance
    of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
    reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
    company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
    are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
    statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
    principles and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
    being made only in accordance with authorizations of management
    and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable
    assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
    unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
    company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
    financial statements.

 

    Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
    financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
    Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
    periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
    inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
    of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

 

    In our opinion, Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and subsidiaries
    maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control
    over financial reporting as of December 31, 2007, based on
    the COSO criteria.

 

    We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the
    Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the
    consolidated balance sheets of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and
    subsidiaries as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, and the
    related consolidated statements of operations,
    stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the three
    years in the period ended December 31, 2007, and our report
    dated March 6, 2008 expressed an unqualified opinion
    thereon.

 

    /s/ UHY LLP

 

    Houston, Texas


    March 6, 2008



    52



Table of Contents


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    BALANCE SHEETS


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 




 


 


(In thousands, except



 




 


 


for share and per share



 




 


 


amounts)


 



 





ASSETS






    Cash and cash equivalents



 


    $


    43,693


 


 


    $


    39,745


 





    Trade receivables, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of
    $1,924 and



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    $826 at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively



 


 


    130,094


 


 


 


    95,766


 





    Inventories



 


 


    32,209


 


 


 


    28,615


 





    Prepaid expenses and other



 


 


    11,898


 


 


 


    16,636


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total current assets



 


 


    217,894


 


 


 


    180,762


 





    Property and equipment, at cost net of accumulated depreciation
    of $77,008 and $29,743 at December 31, 2007 and 2006,
    respectively



 


 


    626,668


 


 


 


    554,258


 





    Goodwill



 


 


    138,398


 


 


 


    125,835


 





    Other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization of
    $6,218 and $4,475 at December 31, 2007 and 2006,
    respectively



 


 


    35,180


 


 


 


    32,840


 





    Debt issuance costs, net of accumulated amortization of $2,718
    and $1,501 at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively



 


 


    14,228


 


 


 


    9,633


 





    Other assets



 


 


    21,217


 


 


 


    4,998


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets



 


    $


    1,053,585


 


 


    $


    908,326


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 




LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY





    Current maturities of long-term debt



 


    $


    6,434


 


 


    $


    6,999


 





    Trade accounts payable



 


 


    37,464


 


 


 


    25,666


 





    Accrued salaries, benefits and payroll taxes



 


 


    15,283


 


 


 


    10,888


 





    Accrued interest



 


 


    17,817


 


 


 


    11,867


 





    Accrued expenses



 


 


    20,545


 


 


 


    16,951


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total current liabilities



 


 


    97,543


 


 


 


    72,371


 





    Deferred income tax liability



 


 


    30,090


 


 


 


    19,953


 





    Long-term debt, net of current maturities



 


 


    508,300


 


 


 


    561,446


 





    Other long-term liabilities



 


 


    3,323


 


 


 


    623


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities



 


 


    639,256


 


 


 


    654,393


 





    Commitments and Contingencies



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Stockholders’ Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Preferred stock, $0.01 par value (25,000,000 shares
    authorized, none issued)



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Common stock, $0.01 par value (100,000,000 shares
    authorized; 35,116,035 issued and outstanding at
    December 31, 2007 and 28,233,411 issued and outstanding at
    December 31, 2006)



 


 


    351


 


 


 


    282


 





    Capital in excess of par value



 


 


    326,095


 


 


 


    216,208


 





    Retained earnings



 


 


    87,883


 


 


 


    37,443


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total stockholders’ equity



 


 


    414,329


 


 


 


    253,933


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity



 


    $


    1,053,585


 


 


    $


    908,326


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    53



Table of Contents


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 




 


 


(In thousands, except per



 




 


 


share amounts)


 



 





    Revenues



 


    $


    570,967


 


 


    $


    310,964


 


 


    $


    108,022


 





    Cost of revenues



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Direct costs



 


 


    341,450


 


 


 


    185,579


 


 


 


    72,567


 





    Depreciation



 


 


    50,914


 


 


 


    20,261


 


 


 


    4,874


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Gross margin



 


 


    178,603


 


 


 


    105,124


 


 


 


    30,581


 





    General and administrative expenses



 


 


    58,622


 


 


 


    35,536


 


 


 


    15,576


 





    Gain on capillary asset sale



 


 


    (8,868


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Amortization



 


 


    4,067


 


 


 


    1,858


 


 


 


    1,487


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income from operations



 


 


    124,782


 


 


 


    67,730


 


 


 


    13,518


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Other income (expense):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Interest expense



 


 


    (49,534


    )


 


 


    (21,309


    )


 


 


    (4,746


    )





    Interest income



 


 


    3,259


 


 


 


    972


 


 


 


    49


 





    Other



 


 


    776


 


 


 


    (347


    )


 


 


    186


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total other expense



 


 


    (45,499


    )


 


 


    (20,684


    )


 


 


    (4,511


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income before minority interest and income taxes



 


 


    79,283


 


 


 


    47,046


 


 


 


    9,007


 





    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (488


    )





    Provision for income taxes



 


 


    (28,843


    )


 


 


    (11,420


    )


 


 


    (1,344


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income per common share:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


    $


    1.48


 


 


    $


    1.73


 


 


    $


    0.48


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Diluted



 


    $


    1.45


 


 


    $


    1.66


 


 


    $


    0.44


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Weighted average number of common shares outstanding:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


 


    34,158


 


 


 


    20,548


 


 


 


    14,832


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Diluted



 


 


    34,701


 


 


 


    21,410


 


 


 


    16,238


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    54



Table of Contents


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Capital in



 


 


Retained



 


 


Total



 




 


 


Common Stock


 


 


Excess of



 


 


Earnings



 


 


Stockholders’



 




 


 


Shares


 


 


Amount


 


 


Par Value


 


 


(Deficit)


 


 


Equity


 




 


 


(In thousands, except share amounts)


 



 





    Balances, December 31, 2004



 


 


    13,611,525


 


 


    $


    136


 


 


    $


    40,331


 


 


    $


    (5,358


    )


 


    $


    35,109


 





    Net income



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    7,175


 


 


 


    7,175


 





    Issuance of common stock:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Acquisitions



 


 


    411,275


 


 


 


    4


 


 


 


    1,746


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,750


 





    Secondary public offering, net of offering costs



 


 


    1,761,034


 


 


 


    18


 


 


 


    15,441


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,459


 





    Stock options and warrants exercised



 


 


    1,076,154


 


 


 


    11


 


 


 


    1,371


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,382


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Balances, December 31, 2005



 


 


    16,859,988


 


 


 


    169


 


 


 


    58,889


 


 


 


    1,817


 


 


 


    60,875


 





    Net income



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    35,626


 


 


 


    35,626


 





    Issuance of common stock:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Acquisitions



 


 


    6,072,046


 


 


 


    61


 


 


 


    94,919


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    94,980


 





    Secondary public offering, net of offering costs



 


 


    3,450,000


 


 


 


    34


 


 


 


    46,263


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    46,297


 





    Issuance under stock plans



 


 


    1,851,377


 


 


 


    18


 


 


 


    6,303


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,321


 





    Stock-based compensation



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,394


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,394


 





    Tax benefits on stock plans



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,440


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,440


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Balances, December 31, 2006



 


 


    28,233,411


 


 


 


    282


 


 


 


    216,208


 


 


 


    37,443


 


 


 


    253,933


 





    Net income



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    50,440


 


 


 


    50,440


 





    Issuance of common stock:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Secondary public offering, net of offering costs



 


 


    6,000,000


 


 


 


    60


 


 


 


    99,995


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    100,055


 





    Issuance under stock plans



 


 


    882,624


 


 


 


    9


 


 


 


    3,310


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,319


 





    Stock-based compensation



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,863


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,863


 





    Tax benefits on stock plans



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,719


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,719


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Balances, December 31, 2007



 


 


    35,116,035


 


 


    $


    351


 


 


    $


    326,095


 


 


    $


    87,883


 


 


    $


    414,329


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    55



Table of Contents


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

CONSOLIDATED
    STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS


 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Cash Flows from Operating Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 





    Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
    operating activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Depreciation and amortization



 


 


    54,981


 


 


 


    22,119


 


 


 


    6,361


 





    Amortization and write-off of deferred financing fees



 


 


    3,197


 


 


 


    1,527


 


 


 


    962


 





    Stock-based compensation



 


 


    4,863


 


 


 


    3,394


 


 


 


    —


 





    Allowance for bad debts



 


 


    730


 


 


 


    781


 


 


 


    219


 





    Imputed interest



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    355


 


 


 


    —


 





    Deferred taxes



 


 


    8,017


 


 


 


    2,215


 


 


 


    —


 





    Minority interest in income of subsidiaries



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    488


 





    Gain on sale of property and equipment



 


 


    (2,323


    )


 


 


    (2,444


    )


 


 


    (669


    )





    Gain on capillary asset sale



 


 


    (8,868


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Increase in accounts receivable



 


 


    (30,825


    )


 


 


    (23,175


    )


 


 


    (10,656


    )





    Increase in inventories



 


 


    (5,375


    )


 


 


    (2,637


    )


 


 


    (3,072


    )





    Decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets



 


 


    8,202


 


 


 


    2,505


 


 


 


    929


 





    Increase (decrease) in other assets



 


 


    (4,492


    )


 


 


    308


 


 


 


    (936


    )





    Increase (decrease) in trade accounts payable



 


 


    10,732


 


 


 


    (2,337


    )


 


 


    2,373


 





    Increase in accrued interest



 


 


    5,950


 


 


 


    11,382


 


 


 


    324


 





    Increase (decrease) in accrued expenses



 


 


    1,508


 


 


 


    872


 


 


 


    (97


    )





    Increase (decrease) in other liabilities



 


 


    2,700


 


 


 


    (224


    )


 


 


    (266


    )





    Increase in accrued salaries, benefits and payroll taxes



 


 


    4,031


 


 


 


    3,392


 


 


 


    443


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided by operating activities



 


 


    103,468


 


 


 


    53,659


 


 


 


    3,578


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Investing Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Acquisitions, net of cash acquired



 


 


    (41,000


    )


 


 


    (526,572


    )


 


 


    (36,888


    )





    Purchase of investment interests



 


 


    (498


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Purchase of property and equipment



 


 


    (113,151


    )


 


 


    (39,697


    )


 


 


    (17,767


    )





    Deposits on asset commitments



 


 


    (11,488


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Proceeds from sale of capillary assets



 


 


    16,250


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Proceeds from sale of property and equipment



 


 


    12,811


 


 


 


    6,881


 


 


 


    1,579


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash used in investing activities



 


 


    (137,076


    )


 


 


    (559,388


    )


 


 


    (53,076


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Financing Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt



 


 


    250,000


 


 


 


    557,820


 


 


 


    56,251


 





    Payments on long-term debt



 


 


    (309,745


    )


 


 


    (54,030


    )


 


 


    (28,202


    )





    Payments on related party debt



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,031


    )


 


 


    (1,522


    )





    Net (repayments) borrowings on lines of credit



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (6,400


    )


 


 


    2,527


 





    Proceeds from issuance of common stock, net of offering costs



 


 


    100,055


 


 


 


    46,297


 


 


 


    15,459


 





    Proceeds from exercise of options and warrants



 


 


    3,319


 


 


 


    6,321


 


 


 


    1,382


 





    Tax benefit on stock plans



 


 


    1,719


 


 


 


    6,440


 


 


 


    —


 





    Debt issuance costs



 


 


    (7,792


    )


 


 


    (9,863


    )


 


 


    (1,821


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided by financing activities



 


 


    37,556


 


 


 


    543,554


 


 


 


    44,074


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents



 


 


    3,948


 


 


 


    37,825


 


 


 


(5,424


    )





    Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year



 


 


    39,745


 


 


 


    1,920


 


 


 


    7,344


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Cash and cash equivalents at end of year



 


    $


    43,693


 


 


    $


    39,745


 


 


    $


    1,920


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The accompanying Notes are an integral part of the Consolidated
    Financial Statements.



    56



Table of Contents


 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial Statements


 







NOTE 1 —
    


NATURE OF
    BUSINESS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING
    POLICIES



 

Organization
    of Business

 

    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. (“Allis-Chalmers”,
    “we”, “our” or “us”) was
    incorporated in Delaware in 1913. We provide services and
    equipment to oil and natural gas exploration and production
    companies throughout the United States including Texas,
    Louisiana, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Wyoming,
    Arkansas, West Virginia, offshore in the Gulf of Mexico, and
    internationally, primarily in Argentina and Mexico. We operate
    in six sectors of the oil and natural gas service industry:
    Rental Services; International Drilling; Directional Drilling;
    Tubular Services; Underbalanced Drilling and Production Services.

 

    The nature of our operations and the many regions in which we
    operate subject us to changing economic, regulatory and
    political conditions. We are vulnerable to near-term and
    long-term changes in the demand for and prices of oil and
    natural gas and the related demand for oilfield service
    operations.

 

Use of
    Estimates

 

    The preparation of financial statements in conformity with
    accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
    America requires management to make estimates and assumptions
    that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
    disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
    the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues
    and expenses during the reporting period. Future events and
    their effects cannot be perceived with certainty. Accordingly,
    our accounting estimates require the exercise of judgment. While
    management believes that the estimates and assumptions used in
    the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are
    appropriate, actual results could differ from those estimates.
    Estimates are used for, but are not limited to, determining the
    following: allowance for doubtful accounts, recoverability of
    long-lived assets and intangibles, useful lives used in
    depreciation and amortization, income taxes and valuation
    allowances. The accounting estimates used in the preparation of
    the consolidated financial statements may change as new events
    occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information
    is obtained and as our operating environment changes.

 

Principles
    of Consolidation

 

    The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
    Allis-Chalmers and its subsidiaries. Our subsidiaries at
    December 31, 2007 are AirComp LLC (“AirComp”),
    Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services LLC (“Tubular”),
    Strata Directional Technology LLC (“Strata”),
    Allis-Chalmers Rental Services LLC (“Rental”),
    Allis-Chalmers Production Services LLC (“Production”),
    Allis-Chalmers Management LLC, Allis-Chalmers Holdings Inc., DLS
    Drilling, Logistics & Services Corporation
    (“DLS”), DLS Argentina Limited, Tanus Argentina S.A.
    (“Tanus”), Petro-Rentals LLC
    (“Petro-Rental”) and Rebel Rentals LLC
    (“Rebel”). All significant inter-company transactions
    have been eliminated.

 

Revenue
    Recognition

 

    We provide rental equipment and drilling services to our
    customers at per day, or daywork, and per job contractual rates
    and recognize the drilling related revenue as the work
    progresses and when collectibility is reasonably assured.
    Revenue from daywork contracts is recognized when it is realized
    or realizable and earned. On daywork contracts, revenue is
    recognized based on the number of days completed at fixed rates
    stipulated by the contract. For certain contracts, we receive
    lump-sum and other fees for equipment and other mobilization
    costs. Mobilization fees and the related costs are deferred and
    amortized over the contract terms when material. We recognize
    reimbursements received for out-of-pocket expenses incurred as
    revenues and account for out-of-pocket expenses as direct costs.
    Payments from customers for the cost of oilfield rental
    equipment that is damaged or
    lost-in-hole
    are reflected as revenues. We recognized revenue from damaged or
    lost-in-hole
    equipment of $12.6 million, $2.4 million and $970,000
    for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005,
    respectively. The Securities and Exchange Commission’s
    (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 104, Revenue
    Recognition In Financial Statements
    (“SAB No. 104”), provides guidance on
    the SEC staff’s views on the application of generally
    accepted accounting principles to selected revenue



    57



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    recognition issues. Our revenue recognition policy is in
    accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
    SAB No. 104.

 

Allowance
    for Doubtful Accounts

 

    Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal
    trade terms. We sell our services to oil and natural gas
    exploration and production companies. We perform continuing
    credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition
    and although we generally do not require collateral, letters of
    credit may be required from customers in certain circumstances.

 

    The allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of
    the amount of probable credit losses existing in our accounts
    receivable. Significant individual accounts receivable balances
    which have been outstanding greater than 90 days are
    reviewed individually for collectibility. We have a limited
    number of customers with individually large amounts due at any
    given date. Any unanticipated change in any one of these
    customer’s credit worthiness or other matters affecting the
    collectibility of amounts due from such customers could have a
    material effect on the results of operations in the period in
    which such changes or events occur. After all attempts to
    collect a receivable have failed, the receivable is written off
    against the allowance. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, we
    had recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of
    $1.9 million and $826,000 respectively. Bad debt expense
    was $1.3 million, $781,000 and $219,000 for the years ended
    December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively.

 

Cash
    Equivalents

 

    We consider all highly liquid investments with an original
    maturity of three months or less at the time of purchase to be
    cash equivalents.

 

Inventories

 

    Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is
    determined using the first — in, first — out
    (“FIFO”) method or the average cost method, which
    approximates FIFO, and includes the cost of materials, labor and
    manufacturing overhead.

 

Property
    and Equipment

 

    Property and equipment is recorded at cost less accumulated
    depreciation. Certain equipment held under capital leases are
    classified as equipment and the related obligations are recorded
    as liabilities.

 

    Maintenance and repairs, which do not improve or extend the life
    of the related assets, are charged to operations when incurred.
    Refurbishments and renewals are capitalized when the value of
    the equipment is enhanced for an extended period. When property
    and equipment are sold or otherwise disposed of, the asset
    account and related accumulated depreciation account are
    relieved, and any gain or loss is included in operations.

 

    The cost of property and equipment currently in service is
    depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related
    assets, which range from three to twenty years. Depreciation is
    computed on the straight-line method for financial reporting
    purposes. Capital leases are amortized using the straight-line
    method over the estimated useful lives of the assets and lease
    amortization is included in depreciation expense. Depreciation
    expense charged to operations was $50.9 million,
    $20.3 million and $4.9 million for the years ended
    December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively.

 

Goodwill,
    Intangible Assets and Amortization

 

    Goodwill, including goodwill associated with equity method
    investments, and other intangible assets with infinite lives are
    not amortized, but tested for impairment annually or more
    frequently if circumstances indicate that impairment may exist.
    Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized either
    on a straight-



    58



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    line basis over the asset’s estimated useful life or on a
    basis that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits
    of the intangible assets are realized.

 

    The impairment test requires the allocation of goodwill and all
    other assets and liabilities to reporting units. If the fair
    value of the reporting unit is less than the book value
    (including goodwill) then goodwill is reduced to its implied
    fair value and the amount of the write-down is charged against
    earnings. We perform impairment tests on the carrying value of
    our goodwill on an annual basis as of
    December 31st for each of our reportable segments. As
    of December 31, 2007 and 2006, no impairment was deemed
    necessary. Increases in estimated future costs or decreases in
    projected revenues could lead to an impairment of all or a
    portion of our goodwill in future period.

 

Impairment
    of Long-Lived Assets

 

    Long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment,
    and other intangible assets, and certain other assets are
    reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
    circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be
    recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded in the period in
    which it is determined that the carrying amount is not
    recoverable. The determination of recoverability is made based
    upon the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, excluding
    interest expense. The impairment loss is determined by comparing
    the fair value, as determined by a discounted cash flow
    analysis, with the carrying value of the related assets.

 

Financial
    Instruments

 

    Financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents,
    accounts receivable and payable, and debt. The carrying value of
    cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable and payable
    approximate fair value due to their short-term nature. We
    believe the fair values and the carrying value of our debt would
    not be materially different due to the instruments’
    interest rates approximating market rates for similar borrowings
    at December 31, 2007 and 2006.

 

Concentration
    of Credit and Customer Risk

 

    Financial instruments that potentially subject us to
    concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash and
    cash equivalents and trade accounts receivable. As of
    December 31, 2007, we have approximately $2.5 million
    of cash and cash equivalents residing in Argentina. We transact
    our business with several financial institutions. However, the
    amount on deposit in six financial institutions exceeded the
    $100,000 federally insured limit at December 31, 2007 by a
    total of $13.2 million. Management believes that the
    financial institutions are financially sound and the risk of
    loss is minimal.

 

    We sell our services to major and independent domestic and
    international oil and natural gas companies. We perform ongoing
    credit valuations of our customers and provide allowances for
    probable credit losses where appropriate. In 2007 and 2006, one
    of our customers, Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina, or
    Pan American Energy, represented 20.7% and 11.7% of our
    consolidated revenues, respectively. In 2005 none of our
    customers accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated
    revenues. Revenues from Materiales y Equipo Petroleo, or Matyep,
    represented 3.4%, 8.3% and 94.5% of our international revenues
    in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Revenues from Pan American
    Energy represented 51.0% and 45.6% of our international revenues
    in 2007 and 2006, respectively.

 

Debt
    Issuance Costs

 

    The costs related to the issuance of debt are capitalized and
    amortized to interest expense using the straight-line method,
    which approximates the interest method, over the maturity
    periods of the related debt.

 

Income
    Taxes

 

    Our income tax expense is based on our income, statutory tax
    rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the
    various jurisdictions in which we operate. We provide for income
    taxes based on the tax



    59



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    laws and rates in effect in the countries in which operations
    are conducted and income is earned. Our income tax expense is
    expected to fluctuate from year to year as our operations are
    conducted in different taxing jurisdictions and the amount of
    pre-tax income fluctuates.

 

    The determination and evaluation of our annual income tax
    provision involves the interpretation of tax laws in various
    jurisdictions in which we operate and requires significant
    judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding
    significant future events such as the amount, timing and
    character of income, deductions and tax credits. Changes in tax
    laws, regulations and our level of operations or profitability
    in each jurisdiction may impact our tax liability in any given
    year. While our annual tax provision is based on the information
    available to us at the time, a number of years may elapse before
    the ultimate tax liabilities in certain tax jurisdictions are
    determined.

 

    Current income tax expense reflects an estimate of our income
    tax liability for the current year, withholding taxes, changes
    in tax rates and changes in prior year tax estimates as returns
    are filed. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized
    for the anticipated future tax effects of temporary differences
    between the financial statement basis and the tax basis of our
    assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates in effect at
    year end. A valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is
    recorded when it is more-likely-than-not that the benefit from
    the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We provide for
    uncertain tax positions pursuant to FASB Interpretation
    No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
    Taxes — an Interpretation of FASB Statement
    No. 109 (“FIN 48”). Our policy is that
    we recognize interest and penalties accrued on any unrecognized
    tax benefits as a component of income tax expense. As of the
    date of adoption of FIN 48, we did not have any accrued
    interest or penalties associated with any unrecognized tax
    benefits. For United States federal tax purposes, our tax
    returns for the tax years 2001 through 2006 remain open for
    examination by the tax authorities. Our foreign tax returns
    remain open for examination for the tax years 2001 through 2006.
    Generally, for state tax purposes, our 2002 through 2006 tax
    years remain open for examination by the tax authorities under a
    four year statute of limitations, however, certain states may
    keep their statute open for six to ten years.

 

    It is our intention to permanently reinvest all of the
    undistributed earnings of our
    non-U.S. subsidiaries
    in such subsidiaries. Accordingly, we have not provided for
    U.S. deferred taxes on the undistributed earnings of our
    non-U.S. subsidiaries.
    If a distribution is made to us from the undistributed earnings
    of these subsidiaries, we could be required to record additional
    taxes. Because we cannot predict when, if at all, we will make a
    distribution of these undistributed earnings, we are unable to
    make a determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred tax
    liability.

 

Stock-Based
    Compensation

 

    We adopted SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payment
    (“SFAS No. 123R”), effective
    January 1, 2006. This statement requires all share-based
    payments to employees, including grants of employee stock
    options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on
    their grant-date fair values. Compensation cost for awards
    granted prior to, but not vested, as of January 1, 2006
    would be based on the grant date attributes originally used to
    value those awards for pro forma purposes under
    SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based
    Compensation (“SFAS No. 123”). We
    adopted SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective
    transition method, utilizing the Black-Scholes option pricing
    model for the calculation of the fair value of our employee
    stock options. Under the modified prospective method, we record
    compensation cost related to unvested stock awards as of
    December 31, 2005 by recognizing the unamortized grant date
    fair value of these awards over the remaining vesting periods of
    those awards with no change in historical reported earnings. We
    estimated forfeiture rates for 2007 and 2006 based on our
    historical experience.

 

    The Black-Scholes model incorporates assumptions to value
    stock-based awards. The risk-free rate of interest is the
    related U.S. Treasury yield curve for periods within the
    expected term of the option at the time of grant. The dividend
    yield on our common stock is assumed to be zero as we have
    historically not paid dividends and have no current plans to do
    so in the future. The expected volatility is based on historical
    volatility of our common stock.



    60



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    Prior to January 1, 2006, we accounted for our stock-based
    compensation using Accounting Principle Board Opinion
    No. 25 (“APB No. 25”). Under APB
    No. 25, compensation expense is recognized for stock
    options with an exercise price that is less than the market
    price on the grant date of the option. For stock options with
    exercise prices at or above the market value of the stock on the
    grant date, we adopted the disclosure-only provisions of
    SFAS No. 123. We also adopted the disclosure-only
    provisions of SFAS No. 123 for the stock options
    granted to our employees and directors. Accordingly, no
    compensation cost was recognized under APB No. 25. Our net
    income for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006
    includes approximately $4.9 million and $3.4 million
    of compensation costs related to share-based payments,
    respectively. The tax benefit recorded in association with the
    share-based payments was $1.7 million and $6.4 million
    for the years-ended December 31, 2007 and 2006,
    respectively. As of December 31, 2007 there is
    $16.3 million of unrecognized compensation expense related
    to non-vested stock based compensation grants.

 

    Had compensation expense for the options granted been recorded
    based on the fair value at the grant date for the options,
    consistent with the provisions of SFAS 123, our net income
    and net income per common share for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 would have been decreased to the pro
    forma amounts indicated below (in thousands, except per share
    amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


 


 


 


For the Year Ended



 




 


 


 


 


 


December 31, 2005


 



 





    Net income attributed to common stockholders as reported:



 


 


 


 


 


    $


    7,175


 





    Less total stock based employee compensation expense determined
    under fair value based method for all awards net of tax related
    effects



 


 


 


 


 


 


    (4,284


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Pro-forma net income attributed to common stockholders



 


 


 


 


 


    $


    2,891


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income per common share:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


 


    As reported


 


 


    $


    0.48


 




 


 


 


    Pro forma


 


 


    $


    0.19


 





    Diluted



 


 


    As reported


 


 


    $


    0.44


 




 


 


 


    Pro forma


 


 


    $


    0.18


 





 

    Options were granted in 2007, 2006 and 2005. See Note 10
    for further disclosures regarding stock options. The following
    assumptions were applied in determining the compensation costs:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


For the Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





    Expected dividend yield



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Expected price volatility



 


 


    66.21


    %


 


 


    72.28


    %


 


 


    84.28


    %





    Risk-free interest rate



 


 


    4.8


    %


 


 


    5.1


    %


 


 


    5.6


    %





    Expected life of options



 


 


    5 years


 


 


 


    7 years


 


 


 


    7 years


 





    Weighted average fair value of options granted at market value



 


    $


    12.86


 


 


    $


    10.58


 


 


    $


    5.02


 





 

Segments
    of an Enterprise and Related Information

 

    We disclose the results of our segments in accordance with
    SFAS No. 131, Disclosures About Segments Of An
    Enterprise And Related Information
    (“SFAS No. 131”). We designate the
    internal organization that is used by management for allocating
    resources and assessing performance as the source of our
    reportable segments. SFAS No. 131 also requires
    disclosures about products and services, geographic areas and
    major customers. Please see Note 14 for further disclosure
    of segment information in accordance with SFAS No. 131.

 

Income
    Per Common Share

 

    We compute income per common share in accordance with the
    provisions of SFAS No. 128, Earnings Per Share
    (“SFAS No. 128”). SFAS No. 128
    requires companies with complex capital structures to present



    61



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    basic and diluted earnings per share. Basic earnings per share
    are computed on the basis of the weighted average number of
    shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted
    earnings per share is similar to basic earnings per share, but
    presents the dilutive effect on a per share basis of potential
    common shares (e.g., convertible preferred stock, stock options,
    etc.) as if they had been converted. Restricted stock grants are
    legally considered issued and outstanding, but are included in
    basic and diluted earnings per share only to the extent that
    they are vested. Unvested restricted stock is included in the
    computation of diluted earnings per share using the treasury
    stock method. Potential dilutive common shares that have an
    anti-dilutive effect (e.g., those that increase income per
    share) are excluded from diluted earnings per share.

 

    The components of basic and diluted earnings per share are as
    follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


For the Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





    Numerator:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    7,175


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Denominator:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Weighted average common shares outstanding excluding nonvested
    restricted stock



 


 


    34,158


 


 


 


    20,548


 


 


 


    14,832


 





    Effect of potentially dilutive common shares:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Warrants and employee and director stock options and restricted
    shares



 


 


    543


 


 


 


    862


 


 


 


    1,406


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Weighted average common shares outstanding and assumed
    conversions



 


 


    34,701


 


 


 


    21,410


 


 


 


    16,238


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income per common share:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


    $


    1.48


 


 


    $


    1.73


 


 


    $


    0.48


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Diluted



 


    $


    1.45


 


 


    $


    1.66


 


 


    $


    0.44


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Potentially dilutive securities excluded as anti-dilutive



 


 


    1,108


 


 


 


    53


 


 


 


    599


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Reclassification

 

    Certain prior period balances have been reclassified to conform
    to current year presentation.

 

New
    Accounting Pronouncements

 

    In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157,
    Fair Value Measurements (“SFAS 157”).
    SFAS 157 clarifies the principle that fair value should be
    based on the assumptions that market participants would use when
    pricing an asset or liability and establishes a fair value
    hierarchy that prioritizes the information used to develop those
    assumptions. Under the standard, fair value measurements would
    be separately disclosed by level within the fair value
    hierarchy. SFAS 157 is effective for financial statements
    issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007,
    and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early
    adoption permitted. Subsequently, the FASB provided for a
    one-year deferral of the provisions of SFAS 157 for
    non-financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or
    disclosed at fair value in the consolidated financial statements
    on a non-recurring basis. We believe that the adoption of
    SFAS 157 will not have a material impact on our financial
    position, results of operations or cash flows.

 

    In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141(R),
    Business Combinations (“SFAS 141(R)”).
    This statement retains the fundamental requirements in
    SFAS No. 141, “Business Combinations” that
    the acquisition method of accounting be used for all business
    combinations and expands the same method of accounting to all
    transactions and other events in which one entity obtains
    control over one or more other businesses or assets at



    62



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    the acquisition date and in subsequent periods. This statement
    replaces SFAS No. 141 by requiring measurement at the
    acquisition date of the fair value of assets acquired,
    liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest.
    Additionally, SFAS 141(R) requires that acquisition-related
    costs, including restructuring costs, be recognized as expense
    separately from the acquisition. SFAS 141(R) applies
    prospectively to business combinations for fiscal years
    beginning after December 15, 2008. We will adopt
    SFAS 141(R) beginning January 1, 2009 and apply to
    future acquisitions.

 

    In February 2007, the FASB issued Statement No. 159, The
    Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities
    (“SFAS 159”), which permits entities to elect to
    measure many financial instruments and certain other items at
    fair value. Upon adoption of SFAS 159, an entity may elect
    the fair value option for eligible items that exist at the
    adoption date. Subsequent to the initial adoption, the election
    of the fair value option should only be made at the initial
    recognition of the asset or liability or upon a re-measurement
    event that gives rise to the new-basis of accounting. All
    subsequent changes in fair value for that instrument are
    reported in earnings. SFAS 159 does not affect any existing
    accounting literature that requires certain assets and
    liabilities to be recorded at fair value nor does it eliminate
    disclosure requirements included in other accounting standards.
    SFAS 159 is effective as of the beginning of each reporting
    entity’s first fiscal year that begins after
    November 15, 2007. We are currently evaluating the
    provisions of SFAS 159 and have not yet determined the
    impact, if any, on our financial statements.

 

    In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 160,
    “Non-controlling Interests in Consolidated Financial
    Statements — an amendment of ARB No. 51”
    (“SFAS 160”). SFAS 160 requires
    (i) that non-controlling (minority) interests be reported
    as a component of shareholders’ equity, (ii) that net
    income attributable to the parent and to the non-controlling
    interest be separately identified in the consolidated statement
    of operations, (iii) that changes in a parent’s
    ownership interest while the parent retains its controlling
    interest be accounted for as equity transactions, (iv) that
    any retained non-controlling equity investment upon the
    deconsolidation of a subsidiary be initially measured at fair
    value, and (v) that sufficient disclosures are provided
    that clearly identify and distinguish between the interests of
    the parent and the interests of the non-controlling owners.
    SFAS 160 is effective for annual periods beginning after
    December 15, 2008 and should be applied prospectively. The
    presentation and disclosure requirements of the statement shall
    be applied retrospectively for all periods presented. We believe
    the adoption of SFAS 160 will not have a material impact on
    our financial position or results of operations.

 







NOTE 2 —
    


POST
    RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS



 

Medical
    And Life

 

    Pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization that was confirmed by the
    Bankruptcy Court after acceptances by our creditors and
    stockholders and was consummated on December 2, 1988, we
    assumed the contractual obligation to Simplicity Manufacturing,
    Inc. (SMI) to reimburse SMI for 50% of the actual cost of
    medical and life insurance claims for a select group of retirees
    (SMI Retirees) of the prior Simplicity Manufacturing Division of
    Allis-Chalmers. The actuarial present value of the expected
    retiree benefit obligation is determined by an actuary and is
    the amount that results from applying actuarial assumptions to
    (1) historical claims-cost data, (2) estimates for the
    time value of money (through discounts for interest) and
    (3) the probability of payment (including decrements for
    death, disability, withdrawal, or retirement) between today and
    expected date of benefit payments. As of December 31, 2007
    and 2006, we have post-retirement benefit obligations of $31,000
    and $304,000, respectively.

 

401(k)
    Savings Plan

 

    On June 30, 2003, we adopted the 401(k) Profit Sharing Plan
    (the “Plan”). The Plan is a defined contribution
    savings plan designed to provide retirement income to our
    eligible employees. The Plan is intended to be qualified under
    Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
    amended. It is funded by voluntary pre-tax contributions from
    eligible employees who may contribute a percentage of their
    eligible



    63



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    compensation, limited and subject to statutory limits. The Plan
    is also funded by discretionary matching employer contributions
    from us. Eligible employees cannot participate in the Plan until
    they have attained the age of 21 and completed three-months of
    service with us. Each participant is 100% vested with respect to
    the participants’ contributions while our matching
    contributions are vested over a three-year period in accordance
    with the Plan document. Contributions are invested, as directed
    by the participant, in investment funds available under the
    Plan. Matching contributions of approximately $1.8 million,
    $735,000 and $114,000 were paid in 2007, 2006 and 2005,
    respectively.

 







NOTE 3 —
    


ACQUISITIONS
    AND SALE OF CAPILLARY ASSETS



 

    On April 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding stock
    of Delta Rental Service, Inc., or Delta, for approximately
    $4.6 million in cash, 223,114 shares of our common
    stock and two promissory notes totaling $350,000. The purchase
    price was allocated to fixed assets and inventory. Delta,
    located in Lafayette, Louisiana, was a rental tool company
    providing specialty rental items to the oil and gas industry
    such as spiral heavy weight drill pipe, test plugs used to test
    blow-out preventors, well head retrieval tools, spacer spools
    and assorted handling tools. The results of Delta since the
    acquisition are included in our Rental Services segment.

 

    On May 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital
    stock of Capcoil Tubing Services, Inc., or Capcoil, for
    approximately $2.7 million in cash, 168,161 shares of
    our common stock and the payment or assumption of approximately
    $1.3 million of debt. Capcoil, located in Kilgore, Texas,
    is engaged in downhole well servicing by providing coil tubing
    services to enhance production from existing wells. Goodwill of
    $184,000 and other identifiable intangible assets of
    $1.4 million were recorded in connection with the
    acquisition. The results of Capcoil since the acquisition are
    included in our Production Services segment.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired the compressed air drilling
    assets of W.T Enterprises, Inc., or W.T., based in South Texas,
    for $6.0 million in cash. The equipment includes
    compressors, boosters, mist pumps and vehicles. Goodwill of
    $82,000 and other identifiable intangible assets of
    $1.5 million were recorded in connection with the
    acquisition. The results of the W.T. assets since their
    acquisition are included in our Underbalanced Drilling segment.

 

    On July 11, 2005, we acquired from M-I L.L.C.
    (“M-I”) its 45% interest in AirComp and subordinated
    note in the principal amount of $4.8 million issued by
    AirComp, for which we paid M-I $7.1 million in cash and
    issued to M-I a $4.0 million subordinated note bearing
    interest at 5% per annum. As a result, we now own 100% of
    AirComp. The results of AirComp are included in our
    Underbalanced Drilling segment.

 

    Effective August 1, 2005, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding capital stock of Target Energy Inc., or Target, for
    approximately $1.3 million in cash and forgiveness of a
    lease receivable of approximately $0.6 million. The
    purchase price was allocated to the fixed assets of Target. The
    results of Target are included in our directional and horizontal
    drilling segment as their Measure While Drilling equipment is
    utilized in that segment.

 

    On September 1, 2005, we acquired the casing and tubing
    service assets of Patterson Services, Inc. for approximately
    $15.6 million. These assets are located in Corpus Christi,
    Texas; Kilgore, Texas; Lafayette, Louisiana and Houma,
    Louisiana. The results of these assets since their acquisition
    are included in our Tubular Services segment.

 

    Effective January 1, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of Specialty Rental Tools, Inc., or Specialty,
    for approximately $95.3 million in cash. In addition,
    approximately $588,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Specialty acquisition. Specialty, located in Lafayette,
    Louisiana, was engaged in the rental of high quality drill pipe,
    heavy weight spiral drill pipe, tubing work strings, blow-out
    preventors, choke manifolds and various valves and handling
    tools for oil and natural gas drilling. The following table



    64



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    summarizes the allocation of the purchase price and related
    acquisition costs to the estimated fair value of the assets
    acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    7,645


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    90,622


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    98,267


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    2,193


 





    Long-term debt



 


 


    74


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities assumed



 


 


    2,267


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    96,000


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Specialty’s historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $71.6 million based on
    third-party valuations. The results of Specialty since the
    acquisition are included in our Rental Services segment.

 

    Effective April 1, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of Rogers Oil Tools, Inc., or Rogers, based in
    Lafayette, Louisiana, for a total consideration of approximately
    $13.7 million, which includes approximately
    $11.3 million in cash, $1.6 million in our common
    stock and a $750,000 three-year promissory note. In addition,
    approximately $380,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Rogers acquisition. Rogers sells, services and rents power drill
    pipe tongs and accessories and rental tongs for snubbing and
    well control applications. Rogers also provides specialized tong
    operators for rental jobs. The following table summarizes the
    allocation of the purchase price and related acquisition costs
    to the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and
    liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    4,520


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    9,866


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    4,941


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    19,327


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    1,376


 





    Deferred income tax liabilities



 


 


    3,760


 





    Other long-term liabilities



 


 


    150


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities assumed



 


 


    5,286


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    14,041


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Rogers’ historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $8.4 million based on
    third-party valuations. Intangible assets include approximately
    $2.4 million assigned to goodwill, $1.2 million
    assigned to patents, $1.1 million assigned to customer list
    and $150,000 assigned to non-compete based on third-party
    valuations and employment contracts. The amortizable intangibles
    have a weighted-average useful life of 10.5 years. The
    results of Rogers since the acquisition are included in our
    Tubular Services segment.

 

    Effective August 14, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of DLS, based in Argentina, for a total
    consideration of approximately $114.5 million, which
    includes approximately $93.7 million in cash,
    $38.1 million in our common stock, less approximately
    $17.3 million of debt assigned to us. In addition,
    approximately $3.4 million of costs were incurred in
    relation to the DLS acquisition. DLS operates a fleet of 51
    rigs, including 20 drilling rigs, 18 workover rigs and 12
    pulling rigs in Argentina and one drilling rig in



    65



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    Bolivia. The following table summarizes the allocation of the
    purchase price and related acquisition costs to the estimated
    fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the
    date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    52,033


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    130,389


 





    Other long-term assets



 


 


    21


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    182,443


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    34,386


 





    Long-term debt, less current portion



 


 


    5,921


 





    Intercompany note



 


 


    17,256


 





    Deferred tax liabilities



 


 


    6,948


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities assumed



 


 


    64,511


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    117,932


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    DLS’ historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $22.7 million based on
    third-party valuations. The results of DLS since the acquisition
    are included in our International Drilling segment.

 

    On October 16, 2006, we acquired 100% of the outstanding
    stock of Petro Rental, based in Lafayette, Louisiana, for a
    total consideration of approximately $33.6 million, which
    includes approximately $20.2 million in cash,
    $3.8 million in our common stock and repaid
    $9.6 million of existing Petro Rental debt. In addition,
    approximately $82,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Petro-Rental acquisition. Petro-Rental provides a variety of
    production-related rental tools and equipment and services,
    including wire line services and equipment, land and offshore
    pumping services and coiled tubing. The following table
    summarizes the allocation of the purchase price and related
    acquisition costs to the estimated fair value of the assets
    acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    8,175


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    28,792


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    5,811


 





    Other long-term assets



 


 


    2


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    42,780


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    2,135


 





    Deferred tax liabilities



 


 


    6,954


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities assumed



 


 


    9,089


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    33,691


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Petro Rental’s historical property and equipment values
    were increased by approximately $13.4 million based on
    third-party valuations. Intangible assets include approximately
    $3.6 million assigned to goodwill and $2.2 million
    assigned to customer relationships based on third-party
    valuations. The amortizable intangibles have a weighted-average
    useful life of 10 years. The results of Petro-Rental since
    the acquisition are included in our Production Services segment.

 

    Effective December 1, 2006, we acquired 100% of the
    outstanding stock of Tanus, based in Argentina, for a total
    consideration of $2.5 million. In addition, approximately
    $17,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the Tanus
    acquisition. Tanus is engaged in the research and manufacturing
    of additives for the oil, natural gas and water well drilling
    and completion fluids in Argentina. The following table
    summarizes the allocation



    66



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    of the purchase price and related acquisition costs to the
    estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities
    assumed at the date of the acquisition (in thousands).

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    2,254


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    2


 





    Goodwill



 


 


    1,504


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    3,760


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    1,243


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    2,517


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    The results of Tanus are reported with DLS under our
    International Drilling segment.

 

    On December 18, 2006, we acquired substantially all of the
    assets of Oil & Gas Rental Services, Inc, or OGR,
    based in Morgan City, Louisiana, for a total consideration of
    approximately $342.4 million, which includes approximately
    $291.0 million in cash, and $51.4 million in our
    common stock. In addition, approximately $3.0 million of
    costs were incurred in relation to the acquisition of the assets
    of OGR The following table summarizes the allocation of the
    purchase price and related acquisition costs to the estimated
    fair value of the assets acquired at the date of acquisition (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    12,735


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    199,015


 





    Investments



 


 


    4,618


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    128,976


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


    $


    345,344


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    OGR’s historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $168.9 million based on
    third-party valuations. Intangible assets include approximately
    $106.1 million assigned to goodwill, $22.0 million to
    customer relations, $831,000 to patents and $35,000 assigned to
    employment agreements based on third-party valuations. The
    amortizable intangibles have a weighted-average useful life of
    10.1 years. The results of the OGR assets since their
    acquisition are included in our Rental Services segment.

 

    On June 29 2007, we acquired Coker Directional, Inc., or Coker,
    for a total consideration of approximately $3.9 million,
    which includes approximately $3.6 million in cash and a
    promissory note for $350,000. In addition, approximately $5,000
    of costs were incurred in relation to the Coker acquisition. The
    following table summarizes the preliminary allocation of the
    purchase price and related acquisition costs to the estimated
    fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the
    date of the acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Property and equipment



 


 


    3


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    3,902


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    3,905


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Intangible assets include approximately $1.8 million
    assigned to goodwill and $2.1 million assigned to customer
    relationships and non-compete. The amortizable intangibles have
    a weighted-average useful life of 9.4 years. The results of
    Coker since the acquisition are included in our Directional
    Drilling segment. We do not expect any material differences from
    the preliminary allocation of the purchase price and the final
    purchase price allocations.

 

    On July 26, 2007, we acquired Diggar Tools, LLC, or Diggar,
    for a total consideration of approximately $10.3 million,
    which includes approximately $6.7 million in cash, a
    promissory note for $750,000 and payment of approximately
    $2.8 million of existing Diggar debt. In addition,
    approximately $29,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Diggar acquisition. The following table summarizes the
    preliminary allocation



    67



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    of the purchase price and related acquisition costs to the
    estimated fair value of the assets acquired at the date of
    acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    1,113


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    7,204


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    2,675


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    10,992


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    622


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    10,370


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Diggar’s historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $3.4 million based on
    third-party valuations. Intangible assets include approximately
    $2.7 million assigned to goodwill. The results of Diggar
    since the acquisition are included in our Directional Drilling
    segment. We do not expect any material differences from the
    preliminary allocation of the purchase price and the final
    purchase price allocations.

 

    On October 23, 2007, we acquired Rebel for a total
    consideration of approximately $7.3 million, which includes
    approximately $5.0 million in cash, promissory notes for an
    aggregate of $500,000, payment of approximately
    $1.5 million of existing Rebel debt and the deposit of
    $305,000 in escrow to cover distributions owed under the Rebel
    Defined Benefit Pension Plan & Trust. In addition,
    approximately $214,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Rebel acquisition. The following table summarizes the
    preliminary allocation of the purchase price and related
    acquisition costs to the estimated fair value of the assets
    acquired at the date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    944


 





    Land, Property and equipment



 


 


    8,736


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    1,144


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    10,824


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    218


 





    Deferred tax liabilities



 


 


    3,095


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities assumed



 


 


    3,313


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    7,511


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Rebel’s historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $8.5 million based on
    third-party valuations. Intangible assets include approximately
    $461,000 assigned to goodwill and $683,000 assigned to customer
    relations. The amortizable intangibles have a useful life of
    15 years. The results of Rebel since the acquisition are
    included in our Tubular services segment. We do not expect any
    material differences from the preliminary allocation of the
    purchase price and the final purchase price allocations.

 

    On November 1, 2007, we acquired substantially all the
    assets Diamondback Oilfield Services, Inc. or Diamondback, for a
    total consideration of approximately $23.1 million in cash.
    Approximately $89,000 of costs were incurred in relation to the
    Diamondback acquisition. The following table summarizes the



    68



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    preliminary allocation of the purchase price and related
    acquisition costs to the estimated fair value of the assets
    acquired at the date of acquisition (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Current assets



 


    $


    3,350


 





    Property and equipment



 


 


    8,701


 





    Intangible assets, including goodwill



 


 


    12,232


 





    Other noncurrent assets



 


 


    10


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets acquired



 


 


    24,293


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Current liabilities



 


 


    1,160


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Net assets acquired



 


    $


    23,133


 




 


 


 


 


 





 

    Diamondback’s historical property and equipment values were
    increased by approximately $2.0 million based on
    third-party valuations. Intangible assets include approximately
    $7.6 million assigned to goodwill, $650,000 assigned to
    non-compete, $620,000 assigned to trade name and
    $3.4 million assigned to customer relations based on
    third-party valuations. The amortizable intangibles have a
    weighted-average useful life of 13.3 years. The sellers are
    entitled to a future cash earn-out payment upon the business
    attaining certain earning objectives. The results of the
    Diamondback assets since their acquisition are included in our
    Directional Drilling segment. We do not expect any material
    differences from the preliminary allocation of the purchase
    price and the final purchase price allocations.

 

    The acquisitions were accounted for using the purchase method of
    accounting. The results of operations of the acquired entities
    since the date of acquisition are included in our consolidated
    income statement.

 

    On June 29, 2007, we sold our capillary tubing units and
    related equipment for approximately $16.3 million. We
    reported a gain of approximately $8.9 million. The assets
    sold represented a small portion of our Production Services
    segment.

 

    The following unaudited pro forma consolidated summary financial
    information for the year ended December 31, 2006
    illustrates the effects of the acquisitions and the related
    public offerings of debt and equity for Rogers, DLS,
    Petro-Rental and OGR as if the acquisitions occurred as of
    January 1, 2006, based on the historical results of the
    acquisitions. The following unaudited pro forma consolidated
    summary financial information for the year ended
    December 31, 2005 illustrates the effects of the
    acquisitions and the related public offerings of debt and equity
    for Delta, Capcoil, W.T., the minority interest in AirComp,
    Specialty, Rogers, DLS, Petro-Rental and OGR as if the
    acquisitions had occurred as of January 1, 2005, based on
    the historical results of the acquisitions. The historical
    results for OGR are based on their historical year end of
    October 31 (in thousands, except per share amounts):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





    Revenues



 


    $


    502,418


 


 


    $


    346,230


 





    Operating income



 


    $


    93,082


 


 


    $


    49,868


 





    Net income



 


    $


    32,358


 


 


    $


    1,264


 





    Net income per common share



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


    $


    0.96


 


 


    $


    0.04


 





    Diluted



 


    $


    0.94


 


 


    $


    0.04


 







    69



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 







NOTE 4 —
    


INVENTORIES



 

    Inventories are comprised of the following as of December 31 (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 



 





    Manufactured



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Finished goods



 


    $


    2,198


 


 


    $


    1,476


 





    Work in process



 


 


    1,781


 


 


 


    2,266


 





    Raw materials



 


 


    4,464


 


 


 


    2,638


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total manufactured



 


 


    8,443


 


 


 


    6,380


 





    Hammers



 


 


    1,434


 


 


 


    1,016


 





    Drive pipe



 


 


    420


 


 


 


    716


 





    Rental supplies



 


 


    2,261


 


 


 


    1,845


 





    Chemicals and drilling fluids



 


 


    3,236


 


 


 


    2,673


 





    Rig parts and related inventory



 


 


    9,985


 


 


 


    9,762


 





    Coiled tubing and related inventory



 


 


    1,014


 


 


 


    1,627


 





    Shop supplies and related inventory



 


 


    5,416


 


 


 


    4,596


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total inventories



 


    $


    32,209


 


 


    $


    28,615


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 5 —
    


PROPERTY
    AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS



 

    Property and equipment is comprised of the following as of
    December 31 (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Depreciation



 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Period


 


2007


 


 


2006


 



 





    Land



 


    —


 


    $


    2,040


 


 


    $


    1,810


 





    Building and improvements



 


    15-20 years


 


 


    6,986


 


 


 


    5,392


 





    Transportation equipment



 


    3-10 years


 


 


    26,132


 


 


 


    22,744


 





    Drill pipe and rental equipment



 


    3-20 years


 


 


    350,202


 


 


 


    321,821


 





    Drilling, workover and pulling rigs



 


    20 years


 


 


    127,725


 


 


 


    120,517


 





    Machinery and equipment



 


    3-20 years


 


 


    157,626


 


 


 


    105,926


 





    Furniture, computers, software and leasehold improvements



 


    3-10 years


 


 


    5,817


 


 


 


    3,522


 





    Construction in progress — equipment



 


    N/A


 


 


    27,148


 


 


 


    2,269


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


 


 


 


    703,676


 


 


 


    584,001


 





    Less: accumulated depreciation



 


 


 


 


    (77,008


    )


 


 


    (29,743


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Property and equipment, net



 


 


 


    $


    626,668


 


 


    $


    554,258


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The net book value of equipment recorded under capital leases
    was $285,000 and $1.0 million as of December 31, 2007
    and 2006, respectively.



    70



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    Other intangible assets are as follows as of December 31 (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Amortization



 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Period


 


2007


 


 


2006


 



 





    Intellectual property



 


    10-20 years


 


    $


    1,629


 


 


    $


    1,009


 





    Non-compete agreements



 


    3-5 years


 


 


    2,852


 


 


 


    4,580


 





    Customer relationships



 


    10-15 years


 


 


    33,528


 


 


 


    27,552


 





    Patents



 


    12-15 years


 


 


    2,560


 


 


 


    3,327


 





    Other intangible assets



 


    2-10 years


 


 


    829


 


 


 


    847


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


 


 


 


    41,398


 


 


 


    37,315


 





    Less: accumulated amortization



 


 


 


 


    (6,218


    )


 


 


    (4,475


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Other intangibles assets, net



 


 


 


    $


    35,180


 


 


    $


    32,840


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 




 


 


Gross



 


 


Accumulated



 


 


Gross



 


 


Accumulated



 




 


 


Value


 


 


Amortization


 


 


Value


 


 


Amortization


 



 





    Intellectual property



 


    $


    1,629


 


 


    $


    410


 


 


    $


    1,009


 


 


    $


    349


 





    Non-compete agreements



 


 


    2,852


 


 


 


    1,367


 


 


 


    4,580


 


 


 


    2,707


 





    Customer relationships



 


 


    33,528


 


 


 


    3,497


 


 


 


    27,552


 


 


 


    789


 





    Patents



 


 


    2,560


 


 


 


    423


 


 


 


    3,327


 


 


 


    203


 





    Other intangible assets



 


 


    829


 


 


 


    521


 


 


 


    847


 


 


 


    427


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


    $


    41,398


 


 


    $


    6,218


 


 


    $


    37,315


 


 


    $


    4,475


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Amortization expense related to other intangibles was
    $4.1 million, $1.9 million and $1.5 million for
    the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005,
    respectively. Future amortization of intangible assets at
    December 31, 2007 is as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Intangible Amortization by Period


 




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


2012 and



 




 


 


2008


 


 


2009


 


 


2010


 


 


2011


 


 


Thereafter


 



 





    Intellectual property



 


    $


    96


 


 


    $


    96


 


 


    $


    96


 


 


    $


    96


 


 


    $


    835


 





    Non-compete agreements



 


 


    627


 


 


 


    494


 


 


 


    291


 


 


 


    48


 


 


 


    25


 





    Customer relationships



 


 


    3,227


 


 


 


    3,227


 


 


 


    3,227


 


 


 


    3,227


 


 


 


    17,123


 





    Patents



 


 


    202


 


 


 


    202


 


 


 


    202


 


 


 


    202


 


 


 


    1,329


 





    Other intangible assets



 


 


    107


 


 


 


    90


 


 


 


    79


 


 


 


    30


 


 


 


    2


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total Intangible Amortization



 


    $


    4,259


 


 


    $


    4,109


 


 


    $


    3,895


 


 


    $


    3,603


 


 


    $


    19,314


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 6 —
    


INCOME
    TAXES



 

    We had income before income taxes of $41.7 million,
    $35.9 million and $8.5 million for U.S. tax
    purposes for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and
    2005, respectively. We also had income before income taxes of
    $37.6 million and $11.1 million reported in
    non-U.S. countries
    for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006,
    respectively. We treat the withholding taxes incurred by our
    U.S. subsidiaries in foreign countries as foreign tax, and
    we anticipate using those tax payments to offset U.S. tax.



    71



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    The income tax provision consists of the following (in
    thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





    Current income tax expense:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Federal



 


    $


    6,814


 


 


    $


    5,865


 


 


    $


    123


 





    State



 


 


    1,053


 


 


 


    898


 


 


 


    595


 





    Foreign



 


 


    12,959


 


 


 


    2,442


 


 


 


    626


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


    20,826


 


 


 


    9,205


 


 


 


    1,344


 





    Deferred income tax expense (benefit):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Federal



 


 


    7,081


 


 


 


    (946


    )


 


 


    —


 





    State



 


 


    349


 


 


 


    573


 


 


 


    —


 





    Foreign



 


 


    587


 


 


 


    2,588


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


    8,017


 


 


 


    2,215


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    28,843


 


 


    $


    11,420


 


 


    $


    1,344


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    We are required to file a consolidated U.S. federal income
    tax return. We pay foreign income taxes in Argentina related to
    our International Drilling’s operations and in Mexico
    related to Tubular’s revenues from Matyep.

 

    The following table reconciles the U.S. statutory tax rate
    to our actual tax rate:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





    Statutory income tax rate



 


 


    35.0


    %


 


 


    35.0


    %


 


 


    34.0


    %





    State taxes, net of federal benefit



 


 


    1.8


 


 


 


    2.1


 


 


 


    6.1


 





    Valuation allowances



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (57.7


    )


 


 


    (98.7


    )





    Nondeductible items, permanent differences and other



 


 


    (0.4


    )


 


 


    44.9


 


 


 


    74.4


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Effective tax rate



 


 


    36.4


    %


 


 


    24.3


    %


 


 


    15.8


    %




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Significant components of deferred income tax assets as of
    December 31, were as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 



 





    Deferred income tax assets:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net future (taxable) deductible items



 


    $


    874


 


 


    $


    899


 





    Share-based compensation



 


 


    1,898


 


 


 


    578


 





    Net operating loss carryforwards



 


 


    2,681


 


 


 


    1,698


 





    Foreign tax credits



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,420


 





    A-C Reorganization Trust and Product Liability Trust



 


 


    4,099


 


 


 


    5,500


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total deferred income tax assets



 


 


    9,552


 


 


 


    11,095


 





    Deferred income tax liabilities



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Depreciation and amortization



 


 


    (37,795


    )


 


 


    (28,226


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net deferred income tax liabilities



 


    $


    (28,243


    )


 


    $


    (17,131


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net current deferred income tax asset



 


    $


    1,847


 


 


    $


    2,822


 





    Net noncurrent deferred income tax liability



 


 


    (30,090


    )


 


 


    (19,953


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net deferred income tax liabilities



 


    $


    (28,243


    )


 


    $


    (17,131


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    72



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    Net future tax-deductible items relate primarily to timing
    differences. Timing differences are differences between the tax
    basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in
    the financial statements that will result in differences between
    income for tax purposes and income for financial statement
    purposes in future years.

 

    The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains provisions that limit the
    utilization of net operating loss and tax credit carry forwards
    if there has been a “change of ownership” as described
    in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. Such a change
    of ownership may limit our utilization of our net operating loss
    and tax credit carryforwards, and could be triggered by a public
    offering or by subsequent sales of securities by us or our
    stockholders. This provision has limited the amount of net
    operating losses available to us currently. Net operating loss
    carryforwards for tax purposes at December 31, 2007 and
    2006 were $7.7 million and $4.9 million, respectively,
    expiring through 2024.

 

    Prior to 2006, we did not record an asset for the
    U.S. foreign tax credits as we believed they would not be
    recoverable based on our taxable income. We now project that all
    of the U.S. foreign tax credits will be utilized against
    U.S. income tax.

 

    Our 1988 Plan of Reorganization established the A-C
    Reorganization Trust to settle claims and to make distributions
    to creditors and certain stockholders. We transferred cash and
    certain other property to the A-C Reorganization Trust on
    December 2, 1988. Payments made by us to the A-C
    Reorganization Trust did not generate tax deductions for us upon
    the transfer but generate deductions for us as the A-C
    Reorganization Trust makes payments to holders of claims and for
    administrative expenses. The Plan of Reorganization also created
    a trust to process and liquidate product liability claims.
    Payments made by the A-C Reorganization Trust to the Product
    Liability Trust did not generate current tax deductions for us
    upon the payment but generates deductions for us as the Product
    Liability Trust makes payments to liquidate claims or incurs
    administrative expenses. We believe the aforementioned trusts
    are grantor trusts and therefore we include the income or loss
    of these trusts in our income or loss for tax purposes. The
    income or loss of these trusts is not included in our results of
    operations for financial reporting purposes.

 

    A valuation allowance is established for deferred tax assets
    when management, based upon available information, considers it
    more likely than not that a benefit from such assets will not be
    realized. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the valuation
    allowance was zero.

 

    Approximately $9.7 million and $5.5 million of
    ad valorem, franchise, income, sales and other tax accruals
    are included in our accrued expense balances of
    $20.5 million and $17.0 million as of
    December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

 

    We adopted the provisions of FIN 48 on January 1,
    2007. This interpretation clarifies the accounting for uncertain
    tax positions and requires companies to recognize the impact of
    a tax position in their financial statements, if that position
    is more likely than not of being sustained on audit, based on
    the technical merits of the position. The adoption of
    FIN 48 did not have any impact on the total liabilities or
    stockholders’ equity.



    73



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 







NOTE 7 —
    


DEBT



 

    Our long-term debt consists of the following as of December 31
    (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 



 





    Senior notes



 


    $


    505,000


 


 


    $


    255,000


 





    Bridge loan



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    300,000


 





    Bank term loans



 


 


    4,926


 


 


 


    7,302


 





    Revolving line of credit



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Seller notes



 


 


    2,350


 


 


 


    900


 





    Notes payable to former directors



 


 


    32


 


 


 


    32


 





    Equipment & vehicle installment notes



 


 


    595


 


 


 


    3,502


 





    Insurance premium financing notes



 


 


    1,707


 


 


 


    1,025


 





    Obligations under non-compete agreements



 


 


    110


 


 


 


    270


 





    Capital lease obligations



 


 


    14


 


 


 


    414


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total debt



 


 


    514,734


 


 


 


    568,445


 





    Less: current maturities of long-term debt



 


 


    6,434


 


 


 


    6,999


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Long-term debt



 


    $


    508,300


 


 


    $


    561,446


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    Our weighted average interest rate for all of our outstanding
    debt was approximately 8.7% as of December 31, 2007 and
    9.8% as of December 31, 2006.

 

    Maturities of debt obligations as of December 31, 2007 are
    as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Debt


 


 


Capital Leases


 


 


Total


 



 





    Year Ending:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    December 31, 2008



 


    $


    6,420


 


 


    $


    14


 


 


    $


    6,434


 





    December 31, 2009



 


 


    2,250


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,250


 





    December 31, 2010



 


 


    700


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    700


 





    December 31, 2011



 


 


    350


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    350


 





    December 31, 2012



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Thereafter



 


 


    505,000


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    505,000


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


    $


    514,720


 


 


    $


    14


 


 


    $


    514,734


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

Senior
    notes, bank loans and line of credit agreements

 

    On January 18, 2006 and August 14, 2006, we closed on
    private offerings, to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to
    Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, of $160.0 and
    $95.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior
    notes, respectively. The senior notes are due January 15,
    2014 and bear interest at 9.0%. The proceeds were used to fund
    the acquisitions of Specialty and DLS, to repay existing debt
    and for general corporate purposes.

 

    In January 2007, we closed on a private offering, to qualified
    institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the
    Securities Act, of $250.0 million principal amount of
    8.5% senior notes due 2017. The proceeds of the senior
    notes offering, together with a portion of the proceeds of our
    concurrent common stock offering, were used to repay the debt
    outstanding under our $300.0 million bridge loan facility
    which we incurred to finance our acquisition of substantially
    all the assets of OGR.



    74



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    On December 18, 2006, we closed on a $300.0 million
    senior unsecured bridge loan. The bridge loan was due
    18 months after closing and had a weighted average interest
    rate of 10.6%. The bridge loan, which was repaid on
    January 29, 2007, was used to fund the acquisition of OGR.

 

    On January 18, 2006, we also executed an amended and
    restated credit agreement which provided for a
    $25.0 million revolving line of credit with a maturity of
    January 2010. Our January 2006 amended and restated credit
    agreement contained customary events of default and financial
    covenants and limits our ability to incur additional
    indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay dividends or make
    other distributions, create liens and sell assets. Our
    obligations under the January 2006 amended and restated credit
    agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets
    excluding the DLS assets, but including
    2/3
    of our shares of DLS. On April 26, 2007, we entered into a
    Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, which increased
    our revolving line of credit to $62.0 million, and had a
    final maturity date of April 26, 2012. On December 3,
    2007, we entered into a First Amendment to Second Amended and
    Restated Credit Agreement, which increased our revolving line of
    credit to $90.0 million. The amended and restated credit
    agreement contains customary events of default and financial
    covenants and limits our ability to incur additional
    indebtedness, make capital expenditures, pay dividends or make
    other distributions, create liens and sell assets. Our
    obligations under the amended and restated credit agreement are
    secured by substantially all of our assets located in the United
    States. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, no amounts were
    borrowed on the facility but availability is reduced by
    outstanding letters of credit of $8.4 million and
    $9.7 million, respectively.

 

    As part of our acquisition of DLS, we assumed various bank loans
    with floating interest rates based on LIBOR plus a margin and
    terms ranging from 2 to 5 years. The weighted average
    interest rates on these loans was 6.7% and 7.0% as of
    December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The bank loans
    are denominated in U.S. dollars and the outstanding amount
    due as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 was $4.9 million
    and $7.3 million, respectively.

 

Notes
    payable

 

    As part of the acquisition of Mountain Compressed Air, Inc., or
    MCA, in 2001, we issued a note to the sellers of MCA in the
    original amount of $2.2 million accruing interest at a rate
    of 5.75% per annum. The note was reduced to $1.5 million as
    a result of the settlement of a legal action against the sellers
    in 2003. In March 2005, we reached an agreement with the sellers
    and holders of the note as a result of an action brought against
    us by the sellers. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid the
    holders of the note $1.0 million in cash, and agreed to pay
    an additional $350,000 on June 1, 2006, and an additional
    $150,000 on June 1, 2007, in settlement of all claims. As
    of December 31, 2007 and 2006 the outstanding amounts due
    were $0 and $150,000, respectively.

 

    In connection with the acquisition of Rogers, we issued to the
    seller a note in the amount of $750,000. The note bears interest
    at 5.0% and is due April 3, 2009. In connection with the
    purchase of Coker, we issued to the seller a note in the amount
    of $350,000. The note bears interest at 8.25% and is due June,
    29, 2008. In connection with the purchase of Diggar, we issued
    to the seller a note in the amount of $750,000. The note bears
    interest at 6.0% and is due July 26, 2008. In connection
    with the purchase of Rebel, we issued to the sellers notes in
    the amount of $500,000. The notes bear interest at 5.0% and are
    due October 23, 2008

 

    In 2000 we compensated directors, including current directors
    Nederlander and Toboroff, who served on the board of directors
    from 1989 to March 31, 1999 without compensation, by
    issuing promissory notes totaling $325,000. The notes bear
    interest at the rate of 5.0%. As of December 31, 2007 and
    2006, the principal and accrued interest on these notes totaled
    approximately $32,000.

 

    We have various rig and equipment financing loans with interest
    rates ranging from 7.8% to 8.7% and terms of 2 to 5 years.
    As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the outstanding balances
    for rig and equipment financing loans were $595,000 and
    $3.5 million, respectively.



    75



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    In April 2006 and August 2006, we obtained insurance premium
    financings in the amount of $1.9 million and $896,000 with
    fixed interest rates of 5.6% and 6.0%, respectively. Under terms
    of the agreements, amounts outstanding are paid over
    10 month and 11 month repayment schedules. The
    outstanding balance of these notes was approximately
    $1.0 million as of December 31, 2006. In April 2007
    and August 2007, we obtained insurance premium financings in the
    amount of $3.2 million and $1.3 with fixed interest rates
    of 5.9% and 5.7%, respectively. Under terms of the agreements,
    amounts outstanding are paid over 11 month repayment
    schedules. The outstanding balance of these notes was
    approximately $1.7 million as of December 31, 2007.

 

Other
    debt

 

    In connection with the purchase of Tubular, we agreed to pay a
    total of $1.2 million to the seller in exchange for a
    non-compete agreement. Monthly payments of $20,576 were due
    under this agreement through January 31, 2007. In
    connection with the purchase of Safco-Oil Field Products, Inc.,
    or Safco, we also agreed to pay a total of $150,000 to the
    sellers in exchange for a non-compete agreement. We were
    required to make annual payments of $50,000 through
    September 30, 2007. In connection with the purchase of
    Capcoil, we agreed to pay a total of $500,000 to two management
    employees in exchange for non-compete agreements. We are
    required to make annual payments of $110,000 through May 2008.
    Total amounts due under these non-compete agreements as of
    December 31, 2007 and 2006 were $110,000 and $270,000,
    respectively.

 

    We also have various capital leases with terms that expire in
    2008. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, amounts outstanding
    under capital leases were $14,000 and $414,000, respectively.

 







NOTE 8 —
    


COMMITMENTS
    AND CONTINGENCIES



 

    We have placed orders for capital equipment totaling
    $82.7 million to be received and paid for through 2008.
    Approximately $46.2 million is for drilling and service
    rigs for our International Drilling segment, $26.0 million
    is for six new coiled tubing units and related equipment for our
    Production Services segment, $5.3 million is for rental
    equipment, principally drill pipe, for our Rental Services
    segment and $5.2 million is for casing and tubing tools and
    equipment. The orders are subject to cancellation with minimal
    loss of prior cash deposits, if any.

 

    We rent office space and certain other facilities and shop yards
    for equipment storage and maintenance. Facility rent expense for
    the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 was
    $2.7 million, $1.6 million and $987,000, respectively.

 

    At December 31, 2007, future minimum rental commitments for
    all operating leases are as follows (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  





    Years Ending:



 


 


 


 





    December 31, 2008



 


    $


    2,618


 





    December 31, 2009



 


 


    1,633


 





    December 31, 2010



 


 


    721


 





    December 31, 2011



 


 


    437


 





    December 31, 2012



 


 


    156


 





    Thereafter



 


 


    376


 




 


 


 


 


 





    Total



 


    $


    5,941


 




 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 9 —
    


STOCKHOLDERS’
    EQUITY



 

    As of January 1, 2005, in relation to the acquisition of
    Downhole Injection Services, LLC, or Downhole, we executed a
    business development agreement with CTTV Investments LLC, an
    affiliate of ChevronTexaco Inc., whereby we issued
    20,000 shares of our common stock to CTTV and further
    agreed to issue up to an



    76



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    additional 60,000 shares to CTTV contingent upon our
    subsidiaries receiving certain levels of revenues in 2005 from
    ChevronTexaco and its affiliates. CTTV was a minority owner of
    Downhole, which we acquired in 2004. Based on the terms of the
    agreement, no additional shares have been issued.

 

    During 2005, we issued 223,114 and 168,161 shares of our
    common stock in relation to the Delta and Capcoil acquisitions,
    respectively (see Note 3).

 

    In August 2005, our stockholders approved an amendment to our
    certificate of incorporation to increase the authorized number
    of shares of our common stock from 20 million to
    100 million and to increase our authorized preferred stock
    from 10 million shares to 25 million shares and, we
    completed a secondary public offering in which we sold
    1,761,034 shares for approximately $15.5 million, net
    of expenses.

 

    We also had options and warrants exercised during 2005. Those
    exercises resulted in 1,076,154 shares of our common stock
    being issued for approximately $1.4 million.

 

    During 2006, we issued 125,285, 2.5 million, 246,761 and
    3.2 million shares of our common stock in relation to the
    Rogers, DLS, Petro Rental and OGR asset acquisitions,
    respectively (see Note 3).

 

    On August 14, 2006 we closed on a public offering of
    3,450,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering
    price of $14.50 per share. Net proceeds from the public offering
    of approximately $46.3 million were used to fund a portion
    of our acquisition of DLS.

 

    During 2006, we had options and warrants exercised in 2006,
    which resulted in 1,851,377 shares of our common stock
    being issued for approximately $6.3 million. We recognized
    approximately $3.4 million of compensation expense related
    to stock options in 2006 that was recorded as capital in excess
    of par value (see Note 1). We also recorded approximately
    $6.4 million of tax benefit related to our stock
    compensation plans.

 

    In January 2007 we closed on a public offering of
    6.0 million shares of our common stock at a public offering
    price of $17.65 per share. Net proceeds from the public
    offering, together with the proceeds of our concurrent senior
    notes offering, were used to repay the debt outstanding under
    our $300.0 million bridge loan facility, which we incurred
    to finance the OGR acquisition and for general corporate
    purposes.

 

    We also had restricted stock award grants, and options and
    warrants exercised during 2007, which resulted in
    882,624 shares of our common stock being issued for
    approximately $3.3 million. We recognized approximately
    $4.9 million of compensation expense related to share based
    payments that was recorded as capital in excess of par value
    (see Note 1). We also recorded approximately
    $1.7 million of tax benefit related to our stock
    compensation plans.

 







NOTE 10 —
    


STOCK
    OPTIONS



 

    In 2000, we issued stock options and promissory notes to certain
    current and former directors as compensation for services as
    directors (See Note 7), and our Board of Directors granted
    stock options to these same individuals. Options to purchase
    4,800 shares of our common stock were granted with an
    exercise price of $13.75 per share. These options vested
    immediately and may be exercised any time prior to
    March 28, 2010. As of December 31, 2007, 4,000 of the
    stock options remain outstanding. No compensation expense has
    been recorded for these options that were issued with an
    exercise price equal to the fair value of the common stock at
    the date of grant.

 

    On May 31, 2001, the Board granted to Leonard Toboroff, one
    of our directors, an option to purchase 100,000 shares of
    our common stock at $2.50 per share, exercisable for
    10 years from October 15, 2001. The option was granted
    for services provided by Mr. Toboroff to Oil Quip Rentals,
    Inc., or Oil Quip, prior to the merger, including providing
    financial advisory services, assisting in Oil Quip’s
    capital structure and assisting Oil Quip in finding strategic
    acquisition opportunities. We recorded compensation expense of
    $500,000 for the issuance of the option for the year ended
    December 31, 2001. As of December 31, 2007, all of the
    stock options have been exercised.



    77



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    The 2003 Incentive Stock Plan (“2003 Plan”), as
    amended, permits us to grant to our key employees and outside
    directors various forms of stock incentives, including, among
    others, incentive and non-qualified stock options and restricted
    stock. The 2003 Plan is administered by the Compensation
    Committee of the Board, which consists of two or more directors
    appointed by the Board. The following benefits may be granted
    under the 2003 Plan: (a) stock appreciation rights;
    (b) restricted stock; (c) performance awards;
    (d) incentive stock options; (e) nonqualified stock
    options; and (f) other stock-based awards. Stock incentive
    terms are not to be in excess of ten years. The maximum number
    of shares that may be issued under the 2003 Plan shall be the
    lesser of 3,000,000 shares and 15% of the total number of
    shares of common stock outstanding.

 

    The 2006 Incentive Plan (“2006 Plan”), was approved by
    our stockholders in November 2006. The 2006 Plan is administered
    by the Compensation Committee of the Board, which consists of
    two or more directors appointed by the Board. The maximum number
    of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01
    per share (“Common Stock”), that may be issued under
    the 2006 Plan is equal to 1,500,000 shares, subject to
    adjustment in the event of stock splits and certain other
    corporate events. The 2006 Plan provides for the grant of any or
    all of the following types of awards: (i) stock options,
    including incentive stock options and non-qualified stock
    options; (ii) bonus stock; (iii) restricted stock
    awards; (iv) performance awards; and (v) other
    stock-based awards. Except with respect to awards of incentive
    stock options, all employees, consultants and non-employee
    directors of the Company and its affiliates are eligible to
    participate in the 2006 Plan. The term of each Award shall be
    for such period as may be determined by the Committee; provided,
    that in no event shall the term of any Award exceed a period of
    ten (10) years from the date of its grant.

 

    A summary of our stock option activity and related information
    is as follows:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


December 31, 2007


 


 


December 31, 2006


 


 


December 31, 2005


 




 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 


 


Shares



 


 


Weighted Avg.



 




 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Under



 


 


Exercise



 




 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 


 


Option


 


 


Price


 



 





    Beginning balance



 


 


    1,350,365


 


 


    $


    6.88


 


 


 


    2,860,867


 


 


    $


    5.10


 


 


 


    1,215,000


 


 


    $


    3.20


 





    Granted



 


 


    220,000


 


 


 


    21.83


 


 


 


    15,000


 


 


 


    14.74


 


 


 


    1,695,000


 


 


 


    6.44


 





    Canceled



 


 


    (17,334


    )


 


 


    8.45


 


 


 


    (54,567


    )


 


 


    5.97


 


 


 


    (15,300


    )


 


 


    3.33


 





    Exercised



 


 


    (566,268


    )


 


 


    5.86


 


 


 


    (1,470,935


    )


 


 


    3.54


 


 


 


    (33,833


    )


 


 


    2.80


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Ending balance



 


 


    986,763


 


 


    $


    10.77


 


 


 


    1,350,365


 


 


    $


    6.88


 


 


 


    2,860,867


 


 


    $


    5.10


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The total intrinsic value of stock options (the amount by which
    the market price of the underlying stock on the date of exercise
    exceeds the exercise price of the option) exercised was
    approximately $6.6 million, $18.8 million and $343,000
    during the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005,
    respectively. As of December 31, 2007, there was
    approximately $2.4 million of total unrecognized
    compensation cost related to stock option, with $939,000,
    $918,000 and $532,000 to be recognized during the years ended
    December 31, 2008, 2009 and 2010, respectively.

 

    The following table summarizes additional information about our
    stock options outstanding as of December 31, 2007:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


 


Options Outstanding


 


 


Options Exercisable


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


Weighted Average



 


 


Weighted



 


 


 


 


 


Weighted Average



 


 


Weighted



 




Range of



 


 


 


 


 


Remaining



 


 


Average



 


 


 


 


 


Remaining



 


 


Average



 




Exercise



 


 


Number of



 


 


Contractual Life



 


 


Exercise



 


 


Number of



 


 


Contractual Life



 


 


Exercise



 





Prices



 


 


options


 


 


(in Years)


 


 


Price


 


 


options


 


 


(in Years)


 


 


Price


 



 




    $


    2.75-4.87


 


 


 


    380,699


 


 


 


    7.02


 


 


    $


    4.14


 


 


 


    380,699


 


 


 


    7.02


 


 


    $


    4.14


 




 


    10.85-14.74


 


 


 


    386,064


 


 


 


    7.92


 


 


 


    11.01


 


 


 


    381,069


 


 


 


    7.92


 


 


 


    10.96


 




 


    16.50-21.95


 


 


 


    220,000


 


 


 


    9.59


 


 


 


    21.83


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


    2.75-21.95


 


 


 


    986,763


 


 


 


    7.95


 


 


    $


    10.77


 


 


 


    761,768


 


 


 


    7.47


 


 


    $


    7.55


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    78



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    The aggregate pretax intrinsic value of stock options
    outstanding and exercisable was approximately $5.5 million
    at December 31, 2007. The amount represents the value that
    would have been received by the option holders had the
    respective options been exercised on December 31, 2007.

 

Restricted
    Stock Awards

 

    In addition to stock options, our 2003 and 2006 Plans allow for
    the grant of restricted stock awards (“RSA”). A
    time-lapse RSA is an award of common stock, where each unit
    represents the right to receive at the end of a stipulated
    period one unrestricted share of stock with no exercise price.
    The time-lapse RSA restrictions lapse periodically over an
    extended period of time not exceeding 10 years. We
    determine the fair value of RSAs based on the market price of
    our common stock on the date of grant. Compensation cost for
    RSAs is primarily recognized on a straight-line basis over the
    vesting or service period and is net of forfeitures. A
    performance-based RSA is an award of common stock, where each
    unit represents the right to receive one unrestricted share of
    stock with no exercise price at the attainment of established
    performance criteria. During 2007, we granted 710,000
    performance based RSAs with market conditions. The
    performance-based RSAs are granted, but not earned and issued
    until certain annual total shareholder return criteria are
    attained over the next 3 years. The fair value of the
    performance-based RSAs were based on third-party valuations.

 

    The following table summarizes activity in our nonvested
    restricted stock awards:

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


December 31, 2007


 


 


December 31, 2006


 




 


 


Number



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 


 


Number



 


 


Weighted Ave.



 




 


 


of



 


 


Grant Date Fair



 


 


of



 


 


Grant Date Fair



 




 


 


Shares


 


 


Value Per Share


 


 


Shares


 


 


Value Per Share


 



 





    Beginning balance



 


 


    27,000


 


 


    $


    18.30


 


 


 


    —


 


 


    $


    —


 





    Granted



 


 


    996,203


 


 


 


    17.44


 


 


 


    27,000


 


 


 


    18.30


 





    Vested



 


 


    (30,000


    )


 


 


    18.01


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





    Forfeited



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Ending balance



 


 


    993,203


 


 


    $


    17.45


 


 


 


    27,000


 


 


    $


    18.30


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 

    The total fair value of RSA shares that vested during 2007 was
    approximately $577,000. As of December 31, 2007, there was
    approximately $13.9 million of total unrecognized
    compensation cost related to nonvested RSAs, with
    $6.6 million, $5.0 million, $1.8 million,
    $278,000 and $208,000 to be recognized during the years ended
    December 31, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively.

 







NOTE 11 —
    


STOCK
    PURCHASE WARRANTS



 

    In conjunction with the MCA purchase by Oil Quip in February of
    2001, MCA issued a common stock warrant for 620,000 shares
    to a third-party investment firm that assisted us in its initial
    identification and purchase of the MCA assets. The warrant
    entitles the holder to acquire up to 620,000 shares of
    common stock of MCA at an exercise price of $.01 per share over
    a nine-year period commencing on February 7, 2001.

 

    We issued two warrants (“Warrants A and B”) for the
    purchase of 233,000 total shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $0.75 per share and one warrant for the
    purchase of 67,000 shares of our common stock at an
    exercise price of $5.00 per share (“Warrant C”) in
    connection with our subordinated debt financing for MCA in 2001.
    Warrants A and B were paid off on December 7, 2004. Warrant
    C was exercised during November 2006.

 

    On February 6, 2002, in connection with the acquisition of
    substantially all of the outstanding stock of Strata, we issued
    a warrant for the purchase of 87,500 shares of our common
    stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share over the term of
    four years. The warrants were exercised in August of 2005.

 

    In connection with the Strata Acquisition, on February 19,
    2003, we issued Energy Spectrum an additional warrant to
    purchase 175,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise
    price of $0.75 per share. The warrants were exercised in August
    of 2005.



    79



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    In March 2004, we issued a warrant to purchase
    340,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $2.50 per share to Morgan Joseph & Co., in
    consideration of financial advisory services to be provided by
    Morgan Joseph pursuant to a consulting agreement. The warrants
    were exercised in August 2005.

 

    In April 2004, we issued warrants to purchase 20,000 shares
    of common stock at an exercise price of $0.75 per share to Wells
    Fargo Credit, Inc., in connection with the extension of credit
    by Wells Fargo Credit Inc. The warrants were exercised in August
    2005.

 

    In April 2004, we completed a private placement of
    620,000 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of common stock to the following investors:
    Christopher Engel; Donald Engel; the Engel Defined Benefit Plan;
    RER Corp., a corporation wholly-owned by director Robert
    Nederlander; and Leonard Toboroff, a director. The investors
    invested $1,550,000 in exchange for 620,000 shares of
    common stock for a purchase price equal to $2.50 per share, and
    invested $450,000 in exchange for warrants to purchase
    800,000 shares of common stock at an exercise of $2.50 per
    share, expiring on April 1, 2006. A total of 486,557 of
    these warrants were exercised in 2005 with the remaining portion
    exercised during 2006.

 

    In May 2004, we issued a warrant to purchase 3,000 shares
    of our common stock at an exercise price of $4.75 per share to a
    consultant in consideration of financial advisory services to be
    provided pursuant to a consulting agreement. The warrants were
    exercised in May 2004. This consultant was also granted 16,000
    warrants in May of 2004 exercisable at $4.65 per share. These
    warrants were exercised in November of 2005. Warrants for
    4,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
    $4.65 were also issued to this consultant in May 2004 and were
    exercised in January 2007.

 







NOTE 12 —
    


CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL INFORMATION



 

    Set forth on the following pages are the condensed consolidating
    financial statements of (i) Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    (ii) its subsidiaries that are guarantors of the senior
    notes and revolving credit facility and (iii) the
    subsidiaries that are not guarantors of the senior notes and
    revolving credit facility (in thousands). Prior to the
    acquisition of DLS, all of our subsidiaries were guarantors of
    our senior notes and revolving credit facility, the parent
    company had no independent assets or operations, the guarantees
    were full and unconditional and joint and several.



    80



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING BALANCE SHEETS
    December 31, 2007

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Assets



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Cash and cash equivalents



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    41,176


 


 


    $


    2,517


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    43,693


 





    Trade receivables, net



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    83,126


 


 


 


    46,973


 


 


 


    (5


    )


 


 


    130,094


 





    Inventories



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,699


 


 


 


    16,510


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    32,209


 





    Intercompany receivables



 


 


    76,583


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (76,583


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Note receivable from affiliate



 


 


    8,270


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,270


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Prepaid expenses and other



 


 


    7,731


 


 


 


    2,564


 


 


 


    1,603


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    11,898


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total current assets



 


 


    92,584


 


 


 


    142,565


 


 


 


    67,603


 


 


 


    (84,858


    )


 


 


    217,894


 





    Property and equipment, net



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    477,055


 


 


 


    149,613


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    626,668


 





    Goodwill



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    136,875


 


 


 


    1,523


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    138,398


 





    Other intangible assets, net



 


 


    552


 


 


 


    34,572


 


 


 


    56


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    35,180


 





    Debt issuance costs, net



 


 


    14,228


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    14,228


 





    Note receivable from affiliates



 


 


    16,380


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (16,380


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Investments in affiliates



 


 


    824,410


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (824,410


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Other assets



 


 


    15


 


 


 


    4,977


 


 


 


    16,225


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    21,217


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets



 


    $


    948,169


 


 


    $


    796,044


 


 


    $


    235,020


 


 


    $


    (925,648


    )


 


    $


    1,053,585


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Current maturities of long-term debt



 


    $


    32


 


 


    $


    4,026


 


 


    $


    2,376


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    6,434


 





    Trade accounts payable



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,815


 


 


 


    20,654


 


 


 


    (5


    )


 


 


    37,464


 





    Accrued salaries, benefits and payroll taxes



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,712


 


 


 


    11,571


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    15,283


 





    Accrued interest



 


 


    17,709


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    75


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    17,817


 





    Accrued expenses



 


 


    1,660


 


 


 


    7,127


 


 


 


    11,758


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    20,545


 





    Intercompany payables



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    433,116


 


 


 


    1,185


 


 


 


    (434,301


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Note payable to affiliate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,270


 


 


 


    (8,270


    )


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total current liabilities



 


 


    19,401


 


 


 


    464,829


 


 


 


    55,889


 


 


 


    (442,576


    )


 


 


    97,543


 





    Long-term debt, net of current maturities



 


 


    505,750


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,550


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    508,300


 





    Note payable to affiliate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,380


 


 


 


    (16,380


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Deferred income tax liability



 


 


    8,658


 


 


 


    13,809


 


 


 


    7,623


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    30,090


 





    Other long-term liabilities



 


 


    31


 


 


 


    242


 


 


 


    3,050


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,323


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities



 


 


    533,840


 


 


 


    478,880


 


 


 


    85,492


 


 


 


    (458,956


    )


 


 


    639,256


 





    Commitments and contingencies



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Stockholders’ Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Common stock



 


 


    351


 


 


 


    3,526


 


 


 


    42,963


 


 


 


    (46,489


    )


 


 


    351


 





    Capital in excess of par value



 


 


    326,095


 


 


 


    167,508


 


 


 


    74,969


 


 


 


    (242,477


    )


 


 


    326,095


 





    Retained earnings



 


 


    87,883


 


 


 


    146,130


 


 


 


    31,596


 


 


 


    (177,726


    )


 


 


    87,883


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total stockholders’ equity



 


 


    414,329


 


 


 


    317,164


 


 


 


    149,528


 


 


 


    (466,692


    )


 


 


    414,329


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities and stock holders’ equity



 


    $


    948,169


 


 


    $


    796,044


 


 


    $


    235,020


 


 


    $


    (925,648


    )


 


    $


    1,053,585


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    81



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING INCOME STATEMENTS
    For the Year Ended December 31, 2007

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





    Revenues



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    355,172


 


 


    $


    215,795


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    570,967


 





    Cost of revenues



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Direct costs



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    185,617


 


 


 


    155,833


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    341,450


 





    Depreciation



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    39,659


 


 


 


    11,255


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    50,914


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Gross margin



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    129,896


 


 


 


    48,707


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    178,603


 





    General and administrative



 


 


    4,349


 


 


 


    44,439


 


 


 


    9,834


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    58,622


 





    Gain on capillary asset sale



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,868


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,868


    )





    Amortization



 


 


    46


 


 


 


    3,988


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,067


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income (loss) from operations



 


 


    (4,395


    )


 


 


    90,337


 


 


 


    38,840


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    124,782


 





    Other income (expense):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax



 


 


    102,208


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (102,208


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Interest, net



 


 


    (47,677


    )


 


 


    2,796


 


 


 


    (1,394


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (46,275


    )





    Other



 


 


    304


 


 


 


    336


 


 


 


    136


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    776


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total other income (expense)



 


 


    54,835


 


 


 


    3,132


 


 


 


    (1,258


    )


 


 


    (102,208


    )


 


 


    (45,499


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income before income taxes



 


 


    50,440


 


 


 


    93,469


 


 


 


    37,582


 


 


 


    (102,208


    )


 


 


    79,283


 





    Provision for income taxes



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (16,085


    )


 


 


    (12,758


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (28,843


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income (loss)



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    77,384


 


 


    $


    24,824


 


 


    $


    (102,208


    )


 


    $


    50,440


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    82



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOW
    For the Year Ended December 31, 2007

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


Other



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiaries



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


(Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors)


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Cash Flows from Operating Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income (loss)



 


    $


    50,440


 


 


    $


    77,384


 


 


    $


    24,824


 


 


    $


    (102,208


    )


 


    $


    50,440


 





    Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided
    by operating activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Depreciation & amortization



 


 


    46


 


 


 


    43,647


 


 


 


    11,288


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    54,981


 





    Amortization and write-off of deferred financing fees



 


 


    3,197


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,197


 





    Stock based compensation



 


 


    4,863


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,863


 





    Allowance for bad debts



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    730


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    730


 





    Equity earnings in affiliates



 


 


    (102,208


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    102,208


 


 


 


    —


 





    Deferred taxes



 


 


    7,430


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    587


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,017


 





    Gain on sale of equipment



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,182


    )


 


 


    (141


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,323


    )





    Gain on capillary asset sale



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,868


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (8,868


    )





    Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Increase in accounts receivables



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (17,823


    )


 


 


    (13,002


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (30,825


    )





    Increase in inventories



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (4,286


    )


 


 


    (1,089


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (5,375


    )





    (Increase) Decrease in other current assets



 


 


    (3,003


    )


 


 


    12,075


 


 


 


    (870


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,202


 





    (Increase) decrease in other assets



 


 


    242


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (4,734


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (4,492


    )





    (Decrease) increase in accounts payable



 


 


    (31


    )


 


 


    2,234


 


 


 


    8,529


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    10,732


 





    (Decrease) increase in accrued interest



 


 


    5,954


 


 


 


    33


 


 


 


    (37


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    5,950


 





    (Decrease) increase in accrued expenses



 


 


    1,525


 


 


 


    (3,912


    )


 


 


    3,895


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,508


 





    (Decrease) increase in other liabilities



 


 


    (273


    )


 


 


    (77


    )


 


 


    3,050


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,700


 





    Increase in accrued salaries, benefits and payroll taxes



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    355


 


 


 


    3,676


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,031


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided (used) by operating activities



 


 


    (31,818


    )


 


 


    99,310


 


 


 


    35,976


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    103,468


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Investing Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Acquisitions, net of cash acquired



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (41,000


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (41,000


    )





    83



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


Other



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiaries



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


(Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors)


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





    Purchase of investment interests



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (498


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (498


    )





    Purchase of property and equipment



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (84,240


    )


 


 


    (28,911


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (113,151


    )





    Deposits on asset commitments



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (11,488


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (11,488


    )





    Notes receivable from affiliates



 


 


    (6,809


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,809


 


 


 


    —


 





    Proceeds from sale of capillary assets



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,250


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,250


 





    Proceeds from sale of property and equipment



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    12,666


 


 


 


    145


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    12,811


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided (used) in investing activities



 


 


    (6,809


    )


 


 


    (96,822


    )


 


 


    (40,254


    )


 


 


    6,809


 


 


 


    (137,076


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Financing Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt



 


 


    250,000


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    250,000


 





    Payments on long-term debt



 


 


    (300,000


    )


 


 


    (6,587


    )


 


 


    (3,158


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (309,745


    )





    Accounts receivable from affiliates



 


 


    (8,674


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    8,674


 


 


 


    —


 





    Accounts payable to affiliates



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    7,506


 


 


 


    1,168


 


 


 


    (8,674


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Note payable to affiliate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,809


 


 


 


    (6,809


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Proceeds from issuance of common stock, net of offering costs



 


 


    100,055


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    100,055


 





    Proceeds from exercise of options and warrants



 


 


    3,319


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,319


 





    Tax benefit on stock plans



 


 


    1,719


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,719


 





    Debt issuance costs



 


 


    (7,792


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (7,792


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided (used) by financing activities



 


 


    38,627


 


 


 


    919


 


 


 


    4,819


 


 


 


    (6,809


    )


 


 


    37,556


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net change in cash and cash equivalents



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,407


 


 


 


    541


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,948


 





    Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    37,769


 


 


 


    1,976


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    39,745


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Cash and cash equivalents at end of period



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    41,176


 


 


    $


    2,517


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    43,693


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






    84



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING BALANCE SHEETS
    December 31, 2006

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Assets



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Cash and cash equivalents



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    37,769


 


 


    $


    1,976


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    39,745


 





    Trade receivables, net



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    62,089


 


 


 


    33,971


 


 


 


    (294


    )


 


 


    95,766


 





    Inventories



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    13,194


 


 


 


    15,421


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    28,615


 





    Intercompany receivables



 


 


    67,909


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (67,909


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Note receivable from affiliate



 


 


    5,502


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (5,502


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Prepaid expenses and other



 


 


    5,703


 


 


 


    10,200


 


 


 


    733


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,636


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total current assets



 


 


    79,114


 


 


 


    123,252


 


 


 


    52,101


 


 


 


    (73,705


    )


 


 


    180,762


 





    Property and equipment, net



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    422,297


 


 


 


    131,961


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    554,258


 





    Goodwill



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    124,331


 


 


 


    1,504


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    125,835


 





    Other intangible assets, net



 


 


    598


 


 


 


    32,153


 


 


 


    89


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    32,840


 





    Debt issuance costs, net



 


 


    9,633


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    9,633


 





    Note receivable from affiliates



 


 


    12,339


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (12,339


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Investments in affiliates



 


 


    722,202


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (722,202


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Other assets



 


 


    257


 


 


 


    4,719


 


 


 


    22


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    4,998


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets



 


    $


    824,143


 


 


    $


    706,752


 


 


    $


    185,677


 


 


    $


    (808,246


    )


 


    $


    908,326


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Current maturities of long-term debt



 


    $


    32


 


 


    $


    3,809


 


 


    $


    3,158


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    6,999


 





    Trade accounts payable



 


 


    31


 


 


 


    13,510


 


 


 


    12,125


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    25,666


 





    Accrued salaries, benefits and payroll taxes



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,993


 


 


 


    7,895


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    10,888


 





    Accrued interest



 


 


    11,755


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    112


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    11,867


 





    Accrued expenses



 


 


    135


 


 


 


    9,247


 


 


 


    7,863


 


 


 


    (294


    )


 


 


    16,951


 





    Intercompany payables



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    425,610


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    (425,627


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Note payable to affiliate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    5,502


 


 


 


    (5,502


    )


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total current liabilities



 


 


    11,953


 


 


 


    455,169


 


 


 


    36,672


 


 


 


    (431,423


    )


 


 


    72,371


 





    Long-term debt, net of current maturities



 


 


    555,750


 


 


 


    770


 


 


 


    4,926


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    561,446


 





    Note payable to affiliate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    12,339


 


 


 


    (12,339


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Deferred income tax liability



 


 


    2,203


 


 


 


    10,714


 


 


 


    7,036


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    19,953


 





    Other long-term liabilities



 


 


    304


 


 


 


    319


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    623


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities



 


 


    570,210


 


 


 


    466,972


 


 


 


    60,973


 


 


 


    (443,762


    )


 


 


    654,393


 





    Commitments and contingencies



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Stockholders’ Equity



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Common stock



 


 


    282


 


 


 


    3,526


 


 


 


    42,963


 


 


 


    (46,489


    )


 


 


    282


 





    Capital in excess of par value



 


 


    216,208


 


 


 


    167,508


 


 


 


    74,969


 


 


 


    (242,477


    )


 


 


    216,208


 





    Retained earnings



 


 


    37,443


 


 


 


    68,746


 


 


 


    6,772


 


 


 


    (75,518


    )


 


 


    37,443


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total stockholders’ equity



 


 


    253,933


 


 


 


    239,780


 


 


 


    124,704


 


 


 


    (364,484


    )


 


 


    253,933


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total liabilities and stock holders’ equity



 


    $


    824,143


 


 


    $


    706,752


 


 


    $


    185,677


 


 


    $


    (808,246


    )


 


    $


    908,326


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    85



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING INCOME STATEMENTS
    For the Year Ended December 31, 2006

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





    Revenues



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    241,474


 


 


    $


    69,490


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    310,964


 





    Cost of revenues



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Direct costs



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    134,638


 


 


 


    50,941


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    185,579


 





    Depreciation



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,198


 


 


 


    4,063


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    20,261


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Gross margin



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    90,638


 


 


 


    14,486


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    105,124


 





    General and administrative



 


 


    2,643


 


 


 


    30,651


 


 


 


    2,242


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    35,536


 





    Amortization



 


 


    46


 


 


 


    1,801


 


 


 


    11


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,858


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income (loss) from operations



 


 


    (2,689


    )


 


 


    58,186


 


 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    67,730


 





    Other income (expense):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax



 


 


    58,077


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Interest, net



 


 


    (19,807


    )


 


 


    67


 


 


 


    (597


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (20,337


    )





    Other



 


 


    45


 


 


 


    97


 


 


 


    (489


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (347


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total other income (expense)



 


 


    38,315


 


 


 


    164


 


 


 


    (1,086


    )


 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    (20,684


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income (loss) before income taxes



 


 


    35,626


 


 


 


    58,350


 


 


 


    11,147


 


 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    47,046


 





    Provision for income taxes



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (7,045


    )


 


 


    (4,375


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (11,420


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income (loss)



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    51,305


 


 


    $


    6,772


 


 


    $


    (58,077


    )


 


    $


    35,626


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    86



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

CONDENSED
    CONSOLIDATING STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOW
    For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 (unaudited)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


Other



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiaries



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


(Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors)


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





Cash Flows from Operating Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net income (loss)



 


    $


    35,626


 


 


    $


    51,305


 


 


    $


    6,772


 


 


    $


    (58,077


    )


 


    $


    35,626


 





    Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided
    by operating activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Depreciation & amortization



 


 


    46


 


 


 


    17,999


 


 


 


    4,074


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    22,119


 





    Amortization & write-off of deferred financing fees



 


 


    1,527


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,527


 





    Stock based compensation



 


 


    3,394


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,394


 





    Provision for bad debts



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    781


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    781


 





    Imputed interest



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    355


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    355


 





    Equity earnings in affiliates



 


 


    (58,077


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    58,077


 


 


 


    —


 





    Deferred taxes



 


 


    (619


    )


 


 


    247


 


 


 


    2,587


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,215


 





    Gain on sale of equipment



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,428


    )


 


 


    (16


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,444


    )





    Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Increase in accounts receivables



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (23,144


    )


 


 


    (31


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (23,175


    )





    (Increase) decrease in inventories



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,989


    )


 


 


    352


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,637


    )





    (Increase) decrease in other current assets



 


 


    (2,482


    )


 


 


    4,120


 


 


 


    867


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    2,505


 





    (Increase) decrease in other assets



 


 


    296


 


 


 


    101


 


 


 


    (89


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    308


 





    (Decrease) increase in accounts payable



 


 


    (82


    )


 


 


    3,587


 


 


 


    (5,842


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (2,337


    )





    (Decrease) increase in accrued interest



 


 


    11,508


 


 


 


    (45


    )


 


 


    (81


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    11,382


 





    (Decrease) increase in accrued expenses



 


 


    (390


    )


 


 


    1,633


 


 


 


    (371


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    872


 





    (Decrease) in other liabilities



 


 


    (31


    )


 


 


    (193


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (224


    )





    (Decrease) increase in accrued salaries, benefits and payroll
    taxes



 


 


    (1,951


    )


 


 


    2,780


 


 


 


    2,563


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    3,392


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided (used) by operating activities



 


 


    (11,235


    )


 


 


    54,109


 


 


 


    10,785


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    53,659


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Investing Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Acquisitions, net of cash acquired



 


 


    (528,167


    )


 


 


    3,649


 


 


 


    (2,054


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (526,572


    )





    Notes receivable from affiliates



 


 


    (585


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    585


 


 


 


    —


 





    Purchase of property and equipment



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (33,930


    )


 


 


    (5,767


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (39,697


    )





    87



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Allis-



 


 


 


 


 


Other



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Chalmers



 


 


 


 


 


Subsidiaries



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


(Parent/



 


 


Subsidiary



 


 


(Non-



 


 


Consolidating



 


 


Consolidated



 




 


 


Guarantor)


 


 


Guarantors


 


 


Guarantors)


 


 


Adjustments


 


 


Total


 



 





    Proceeds from sale of property and equipment



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,730


 


 


 


    151


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,881


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided (used) in investing activities



 


 


    (528,752


    )


 


 


    (23,551


    )


 


 


    (7,670


    )


 


 


    585


 


 


 


    (559,388


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Cash Flows from Financing Activities:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Proceeds from long-term debt



 


 


    555,000


 


 


 


    2,820


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    557,820


 





    Payments on long-term debt



 


 


    (42,414


    )


 


 


    (9,875


    )


 


 


    (1,741


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (54,030


    )





    Payments on related party debt



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,031


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,031


    )





    Net (payments) borrowings on lines of credit



 


 


    (6,400


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (6,400


    )





    Accounts receivable from affiliates



 


 


    (16,444


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,444


 


 


 


    —


 





    Accounts payable to affiliates



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    16,427


 


 


 


    17


 


 


 


    (16,444


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Note payable to affiliate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    585


 


 


 


    (585


    )


 


 


    —


 





    Proceeds from issuance of common stock, net of offering costs



 


 


    46,297


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    46,297


 





    Proceeds from exercise of options and warrants



 


 


    6,321


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,321


 





    Tax benefit on stock plans



 


 


    6,440


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    6,440


 





    Debt issuance costs



 


 


    (9,863


    )


 


 


    —


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (9,863


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net cash provided (used) by financing activities



 


 


    538,937


 


 


 


    6,341


 


 


 


    (1,139


    )


 


 


    (585


    )


 


 


    543,554


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Net change in cash and cash equivalents



 


 


    (1,050


    )


 


 


    36,899


 


 


 


    1,976


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    37,825


 





    Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year



 


 


    1,050


 


 


 


    870


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    1,920


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Cash and cash equivalents at end of period



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    37,769


 


 


    $


    1,976


 


 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    39,745


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 13 —
    


RELATED
    PARTY TRANSACTIONS



 

    DLS was acquired from three British Virgin Island corporations.
    Two of our Directors; Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A.
    Bulgheroni, indirectly beneficially own substantially all of the
    shares of the DLS sellers. DLS’ largest customer is Pan
    American Energy which is a joint venture by British Petroleum
    and Bridas Corporation. Alejandro P. Bulgheroni and Carlos A.
    Bulgheroni, indirectly beneficially own substantially all of the
    shares of the Bridas Corporation.

 

    We purchased approximately $3.5 million of general oilfield
    supplies and materials from Ralow Services, Inc., or Ralow in
    2007 for our Rental Services segment. Ralow is owned by Brad A.
    Adams and Bruce A. Adams who are brothers of Burt A. Adams, one
    of our directors and our former President and Chief Operating
    Officer. In addition, Brad A. Adams and Bruce A. Adams were
    employed as officers of Rental during 2007.


    88



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 







NOTE 14 — 


SEGMENT
    INFORMATION



 

    At December 31, 2007, we had six operating segments
    including: Rental Services, International Drilling, Directional
    Drilling, Tubular Services, Underbalanced Drilling and
    Production Services. All of the segments provide services to the
    energy industry. The revenues, operating income (loss),
    depreciation and amortization, capital expenditures and assets
    of each of the reporting segments plus the corporate function
    are reported below (in thousands):

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Revenues:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    121,186


 


 


    $


    51,521


 


 


    $


    5,059


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    215,795


 


 


 


    69,490


 


 


 


    —


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    96,080


 


 


 


    76,471


 


 


 


    46,579


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    53,524


 


 


 


    50,887


 


 


 


    20,932


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    50,959


 


 


 


    43,045


 


 


 


    25,662


 





    Production Services



 


 


    33,423


 


 


 


    19,550


 


 


 


    9,790


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total revenues



 


    $


    570,967


 


 


    $


    310,964


 


 


    $


    108,022


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Operating Income (Loss):



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    49,139


 


 


    $


    26,293


 


 


    $


    1,300


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    38,839


 


 


 


    12,233


 


 


 


    —


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    18,848


 


 


 


    17,666


 


 


 


    7,389


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    10,744


 


 


 


    12,544


 


 


 


    4,994


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    13,091


 


 


 


    10,810


 


 


 


    5,612


 





    Production Services



 


 


    10,535


 


 


 


    2,137


 


 


 


    (99


    )





    General corporate



 


 


    (16,414


    )


 


 


    (13,953


    )


 


 


    (5,678


    )




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total income from operations



 


    $


    124,782


 


 


    $


    67,730


 


 


    $


    13,518


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Depreciation and Amortization Expense:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    26,353


 


 


    $


    7,268


 


 


    $


    492


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    11,288


 


 


 


    4,074


 


 


 


    —


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    3,063


 


 


 


    1,464


 


 


 


    887


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    5,164


 


 


 


    3,908


 


 


 


    2,006


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    3,692


 


 


 


    3,057


 


 


 


    1,946


 





    Production Services



 


 


    4,919


 


 


 


    2,005


 


 


 


    912


 





    General corporate



 


 


    502


 


 


 


    343


 


 


 


    118


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total depreciation and amortization expense



 


    $


    54,981


 


 


    $


    22,119


 


 


    $


    6,361


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Capital Expenditures:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    34,883


 


 


    $


    4,538


 


 


    $


    435


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    28,911


 


 


 


    5,770


 


 


 


    —


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    11,177


 


 


 


    5,128


 


 


 


    2,922


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    9,250


 


 


 


    10,980


 


 


 


    5,207


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    17,443


 


 


 


    7,716


 


 


 


    7,008


 





    Production Services



 


 


    10,740


 


 


 


    5,253


 


 


 


    1,514


 





    General corporate



 


 


    747


 


 


 


    312


 


 


 


    681


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total capital expenditures



 


    $


    113,151


 


 


    $


    39,697


 


 


    $


    17,767


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


    89



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


As of December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Goodwill:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    106,382


 


 


    $


    106,132


 


 


    $


    —


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    1,523


 


 


 


    1,504


 


 


 


    —


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    16,300


 


 


 


    4,168


 


 


 


    4,168


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    6,564


 


 


 


    6,464


 


 


 


    3,673


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    3,950


 


 


 


    3,950


 


 


 


    3,950


 





    Production Services



 


 


    3,679


 


 


 


    3,617


 


 


 


    626


 





    General corporate



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total goodwill



 


    $


    138,398


 


 


    $


    125,835


 


 


    $


    12,417


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Assets:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Rental Services



 


    $


    454,216


 


 


    $


    453,802


 


 


    $


    8,034


 





    International Drilling



 


 


    235,020


 


 


 


    185,677


 


 


 


    —


 





    Directional Drilling



 


 


    82,532


 


 


 


    28,585


 


 


 


    20,960


 





    Tubular Services



 


 


    88,014


 


 


 


    74,372


 


 


 


    45,351


 





    Underbalanced Drilling



 


 


    72,401


 


 


 


    54,288


 


 


 


    46,045


 





    Production Services



 


 


    56,353


 


 


 


    57,954


 


 


 


    12,282


 





    General corporate



 


 


    65,049


 


 


 


    53,648


 


 


 


    4,683


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total assets



 


    $


    1,053,585


 


 


    $


    908,326


 


 


    $


    137,355


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Revenues:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    United States



 


    $


    339,476


 


 


    $


    231,852


 


 


    $


    101,261


 





    International



 


 


    231,491


 


 


 


    79,112


 


 


 


    6,761


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total revenues



 


    $


    570,967


 


 


    $


    310,964


 


 


    $


    108,022


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


As of December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





Long Lived Assets:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    United States



 


    $


    655,513


 


 


    $


    574,302


 


 


    $


    97,390


 





    International



 


 


    180,178


 


 


 


    153,262


 


 


 


    4,313


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Total long lived assets



 


    $


    835,691


 


 


    $


    727,564


 


 


    $


    101,703


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






    90



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 







NOTE 15 — 


SUPPLEMENTAL
    CASH FLOWS INFORMATION (in thousands)



 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


Years Ended December 31,


 




 


 


2007


 


 


2006


 


 


2005


 



 





    Interest paid



 


    $


    40,363


 


 


    $


    8,571


 


 


    $


    3,924


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income taxes paid



 


    $


    17,272


 


 


    $


    5,796


 


 


    $


    676


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





Other non-cash investing and financing transactions:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Insurance premiums financed



 


 


    4,434


 


 


 


    2,871


 


 


 


    —


 





    Purchase of equipment financed through assumption of debt or
    accounts payable



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    592


 





Non-cash investing and financing transactions in connection
    with acquisitions:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Fair value of Property and equipment



 


    $


    4,345


 


 


    $


    109,632


 


 


    $


    1,750


 





    Fair value of goodwill and other intangibles



 


 


    350


 


 


 


    4,010


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    4,695


 


 


    $


    113,642


 


 


    $


    1,750


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Value of common stock, issued



 


    $


    —


 


 


    $


    94,980


 


 


    $


    1,750


 





    Seller financed note



 


 


    1,600


 


 


 


    750


 


 


 


    —


 





    Deferred tax liability



 


 


    3,095


 


 


 


    17,662


 


 


 


    —


 





    Accrued expenses



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    250


 


 


 


    —


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


    $


    4,695


 


 


    $


    113,642


 


 


    $


    1,750


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 







NOTE 16 — 


LEGAL
    MATTERS



 

    We are named from time to time in legal proceedings related to
    our activities prior to our bankruptcy in 1988; however, we
    believe that we were discharged from liability for all such
    claims in the bankruptcy and believe the likelihood of a
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.

 

    We are involved in various other legal proceedings in the
    ordinary course of business. The legal proceedings are at
    different stages; however, we believe that the likelihood of
    material loss relating to any such legal proceeding is remote.

 







NOTE 17 — 


SUBSEQUENT
    EVENTS



 

    On January 23, 2008, we entered into an Agreement and Plan
    of Merger with Bronco Drilling Company, Inc., or Bronco, whereby
    Bronco will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Allis-Chalmers.
    The merger agreement, which was approved by our Board of
    Directors and the Board of Directors of Bronco, provides that
    the Bronco stockholders will receive aggregate merger
    consideration with a value of approximately $437.8 million,
    consisting of (a) $280.0 million in cash and
    (b) shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share,
    having an aggregate value of approximately $157.8 million.
    The number of shares of our common stock to be issued will be
    based on the average closing price of our common stock for the
    ten-trading day period ending two days prior to the closing.
    Completion of the merger is conditioned upon, among other
    things, adoption of the merger agreement by Bronco’s
    stockholders and approval by our stockholders of the issuance of
    shares of our common stock to be used as merger consideration.

 

    In order to finance some or all of the cash component of the
    merger consideration, the repayment of outstanding Bronco debt
    and transaction expenses, we expect to incur debt of up to
    $350.0 million. We intend to obtain up to
    $350.0 million from either (1) a permanent debt
    financing of up to $350.0 million or (2) if the
    permanent debt financing cannot be consummated prior to the
    closing date of the merger, the draw down under a senior
    unsecured bridge loan facility in an aggregate principal amount
    of up to $350.0 million to be arranged by RBC Capital
    Markets Corporation and Goldman Sachs Credit Partners L.P.,
    acting as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners. We
    executed a commitment letter, dated January 28, 2008, with
    Royal Bank of Canada and Goldman Sachs who have each, subject to
    certain conditions, severally committed to provide



    91



Table of Contents

 

ALLIS-CHALMERS
    ENERGY INC.


 

Notes to
    Consolidated Financial
    Statements — (Continued)

 

    50% of the loans under the senior unsecured bridge facility to
    us. This commitment for the bridge loan facility will terminate
    on July 31, 2008, if we have not drawn the bridge facility
    by such date and the merger is not consummated by such date. The
    commitment may also terminate prior to July 31, 2008, if
    the merger is abandoned or a material condition to the merger is
    not satisfied or we breach our obligations under the commitment
    letter. We may use the proceeds of the bridge facility to
    finance the cash component of the merger consideration, repay
    outstanding Bronco debt and pay transaction expenses.

 

    On January 29, 2008, Burt A. Adams resigned as our
    President and Chief Operating Officer, effective
    February 28, 2008. Mr. Adams will remain as a member
    of our Board of Directors. On January 29, 2008, Mark C.
    Patterson was elected our Senior Vice-President —
    Rental Services. On January 29, 2008, Terrence P. Keane was
    elected our Senior Vice-President — Oilfield Services.

 

    On January 31, 2008, we entered into an agreement with BCH
    Ltd., or BCH, to invest $40.0 million in cash in BCH in the
    form of a 15% Convertible Subordinated Secured debenture.
    The debenture is convertible, at any time, at our option into
    49% of the common equity of BCH. At the end of two years, we
    have the option to acquire the remaining 51% of BCH from its
    parent, BrazAlta Resources Corp., or BrazAlta, based on an
    independent valuation from a mutually acceptable investment
    bank. BCH is a Canadian-based oilfield services company engaged
    in contract drilling operations exclusively in Brazil.

 

    On February 15, 2008, through our DLS subsidiary in
    Argentina, we entered into a $25.0 million import finance
    facility with a bank. Borrowings under this facility will be
    used to fund a portion of the purchase price of the new drilling
    and service rigs ordered for our international drilling
    operation. The facility is available for borrowings until
    December 31, 2008. Each drawdown shall be repaid over four
    years in equal semi-annual instalments beginning one year after
    each disbursement with the final principal payment due not later
    than March 15, 2013. Interest is payable every six months.
    The import finance facility is unsecured and contains customary
    events of default and financial covenants and limits DLS’
    ability to incur additional indebtedness, make capital
    expenditures, create liens and sell assets.

 







NOTE 18 — 


SUMMARIZED
    QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED) (in thousands, except per
    share amounts)



 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


First



 


 


Second



 


 


Third



 


 


Fourth



 




 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 





Year 2007



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Revenues



 


    $


    135,900


 


 


    $


    143,362


 


 


    $


    147,881


 


 


    $


    143,824


 





    Operating income



 


 


    31,470


 


 


 


    41,474


 


 


 


    31,148


 


 


 


    20,690


 





    Net income



 


    $


    12,165


 


 


    $


    19,504


 


 


    $


    12,987


 


 


    $


    5,784


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income per common share:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


    $


    0.38


 


 


    $


    0.56


 


 


    $


    0.37


 


 


    $


    0.17


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Diluted



 


    $


    0.37


 


 


    $


    0.55


 


 


    $


    0.37


 


 


    $


    0.16


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


First



 


 


Second



 


 


Third



 


 


Fourth



 




 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 


 


Quarter


 





Year 2006



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Revenues



 


    $


     47,911


 


 


    $


     61,383


 


 


    $


     86,772


 


 


    $


    114,898


 





    Operating income



 


 


    8,856


 


 


 


    16,108


 


 


 


    19,336


 


 


 


    23,430


 





    Net income



 


    $


    4,423


 


 


    $


    9,594


 


 


    $


    11,253


 


 


    $


    10,356


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Income per common share:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Basic



 


    $


    0.26


 


 


    $


    0.53


 


 


    $


    0.52


 


 


    $


    0.41


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Diluted



 


    $


    0.23


 


 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    0.50


 


 


    $


    0.40


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







    92



Table of Contents








ITEM 9.  


CHANGES
    AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL
    DISCLOSURE



 

    None.

 







ITEM 9A.  


CONTROLS
    AND PROCEDURES



 







(a) 


Evaluation
    Of Disclosure Controls And Procedures



 

    Our management, with the participation of our Chief Executive
    Officer and Chief Financial Officer, evaluated the effectiveness
    of our “disclosure controls and procedures” (as
    defined in Exchange Act
    Rules 13a-15(e)
    and
    15d-15(e)),
    as of December 31, 2007. Based on their evaluation, they
    have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures as of
    the end of the period covered by this report were adequate to
    ensure that (1) information required to be disclosed by us
    in the reports filed or furnished by us under the Securities
    Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, is recorded, processed,
    summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
    rules and forms of the SEC and (2) such information is
    accumulated and communicated to our management, including our
    Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, to allow
    timely decisions regarding required disclosure. Based on that
    evaluation, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
    Officer have concluded that our disclosure controls and
    procedures as of December 31, 2007 were effective at
    reaching a reasonable level of assurance of achieving the
    desired objective.

 







(b) 


Management’s
    Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting



 

    Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
    adequate internal control over financial reporting as that term
    is defined in Exchange Act
    Rule 13a-15(f).
    Our internal control over financial reporting is a process
    designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
    reliability of our financial reporting and the preparation of
    our financial statements for external purposes in accordance
    with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our
    control environment is the foundation for our system of internal
    control over financial reporting and is an integral part of our
    Code of Ethics for the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial
    Officer and Chief Accounting Officer, which sets the tone of our
    company. Our internal control over financial reporting includes
    those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the
    maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
    and fairly reflect our transactions and dispositions of our
    assets; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
    are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of our financial
    statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
    principles, and that our receipts and expenditures are being
    made only in accordance with authorizations of our management
    and directors; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance
    regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
    acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a
    material effect on our financial statements. Our evaluation did
    not include companies which were acquired during fiscal year
    2007, since, under SEC guidelines, acquisitions do not have to
    evaluated until twelve months after the acquisition date.

 

    In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our internal control
    over financial reporting as of December 31, 2007, as
    required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,
    our management conducted an assessment, including testing, based
    on the criteria set forth in Internal Control —
    Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
    Organizations of the Treadway Commission (the “COSO
    Framework”). Because of its inherent limitations, internal
    control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
    misstatements. In addition, projections of any evaluation of
    effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
    controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions
    or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
    may deteriorate.

 

    Under the supervision and with the participation of our
    management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief
    Financial Officer, we conducted an evaluation of the
    effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
    and, based on that assessment, and concluded that, as of
    December 31, 2007, our internal controls over financial
    reporting are effective based on these criteria.

 

Management
    Report on Internal Control Over Financial
    Reporting.

 

    Our Management Report on Internal Controls Over Financial
    Reporting can be found in Item 8 of this report. UHY LLP,
    an independent registered public accounting firm, has issued a
    report on our internal control over financial reporting as of
    December 31, 2007, which can be found in Item 8 of
    this report.



    93



Table of Contents








(c) 


Change in
    Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.



 

    During the most recent fiscal quarter, there have been no
    changes in our internal control over financial reporting that
    have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
    affect, our internal control over financial reporting.

 







ITEM 9B.  


OTHER
    INFORMATION



 

    None.


 

PART III


 







ITEM 10.  


DIRECTORS,
    EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE



 

    Pursuant to General Instructions G(3), information on
    directors and executive officers of Allis-Chalmers will be filed
    in an amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from our Definitive Proxy Statement
    for the 2008 annual meeting of stockholders within 120 days
    of the end of our fiscal year ending December 31, 2007.

 







ITEM 11.  


EXECUTIVE
    COMPENSATION



 

    Pursuant to General Instructions G(3), information on
    executive compensation will be filed in an amendment to this
    Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from our Definitive Proxy Statement
    for the 2008 annual meeting of stockholders within 120 days
    of the end of our fiscal year ending December 31, 2007.

 







ITEM 12.  


SECURITY
    OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND
    RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTER



 

    Pursuant to General Instruction G(3), information on
    security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
    will be filed in an amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from our Definitive Proxy Statement
    for the 2008 annual meeting of stockholders within 120 days
    of the end of our fiscal year ending December 31, 2007.

 







ITEM 13.  


CERTAIN
    RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR
    INDEPENDENCE



 

    Pursuant to General Instruction G(3), information on
    security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
    will be filed in an amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from our Definitive Proxy Statement
    for the 2008 annual meeting of stockholders within 120 days
    of the end of our fiscal year ending December 31, 2007.

 







ITEM 14.  


PRINCIPAL
    ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES



 

    Pursuant to General Instruction G(3), information on
    principal accountant fees and services will be filed in an
    amendment to this Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    or incorporated by reference from our Definitive Proxy Statement
    for the 2008 annual meeting of stockholders within 120 days
    of the end of our fiscal year ending December 31, 2007.



    94



Table of Contents


 

PART IV


 







ITEM 15.  


EXHIBITS AND
    FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES



 

    (a)(1) Financial Statements

 

    Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2007 and
    2006.


    Consolidated Statements of Operations as of December 31,
    2007, 2006 and 2005.


    Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity as of
    December 31, 2007, 2006, 2005 and 2004.


    Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as of December 31,
    2007, 2006 and 2005.


    Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.

 

    (2) Financial Statement Schedules

 

    Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts

 

    (3) Exhibits

 

    The exhibits listed on the accompanying Exhibit Index or
    incorporated by reference into this annual report on
    Form 10-K.

 







(2) 


Financial
    Statement Schedule:



 

Schedule II —
    Valuation and Qualifying Accounts

 

Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc.
    Valuation and Qualifying Accounts

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  




 


 


 


 


 


Additions



 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


Balance at



 


 


Charged to



 


 


 


 


 


Balance at



 




 


 


Beginning



 


 


Costs and



 


 


 


 


 


End of



 





Description



 


of Period


 


 


Expense


 


 


Deductions


 


 


Period


 




 


 


(In thousands)


 



 





Year Ended December 31, 2007:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Allowance for doubtful accounts



 


 


    826


 


 


 


    1,309


 


 


 


    (211


    )


 


 


    1,924


 





    Deferred tax assets valuation allowance



 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    —


 





Year Ended December 31, 2006:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Allowance for doubtful accounts



 


 


    383


 


 


 


    781


 


 


 


    (338


    )


 


 


    826


 





    Deferred tax assets valuation allowance



 


 


    27,131


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (27,131


    )


 


 


    —


 





Year Ended December 31, 2005:



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





    Allowance for doubtful accounts



 


 


    265


 


 


 


    219


 


 


 


    (101


    )


 


 


    383


 





    Deferred tax assets valuation allowance



 


 


    30,367


 


 


 


    —


 


 


 


    (3,236


    )


 


 


    27,131


 







    95



Table of Contents


SIGNATURES

 

    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
    Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the registrant has
    duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
    undersigned, thereunto duly authorized on March 6, 2008.

 

/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH



Munawar H. Hidayatallah


Chief Executive Officer and Chairman

 

    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the
    Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has
    been signed on the date indicated by the following persons on
    behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated.

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
  





Name



 



Title



 



Date




 




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  MUNAWAR
    H. HIDAYATALLAH
Munawar
    H. Hidayatalla


 


    Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive
    Officer)


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  VICTOR
    M. PEREZ
Victor
    M. Perez


 


    Chief Financial Officer
    (Principal Financial Officer)


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  BRUCE
    SAUERS
Bruce
    Sauers


 


    Chief Accounting Officer
    (Principal Accounting Officer)


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  BURT
    A. ADAMS
Burt
    A. Adams


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




    
Ali
    H. M. Afdhal


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  ALEJANDRO
    P. BULGHERONI
Alejandro
    P. Bulgheroni


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




    
Carlos
    A. Bulgheroni


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  VICTOR
    F. GERMACK
Victor
    F. Germack


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JAMES
    M. HENNESSY
James
    M. Hennessy


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  JOHN
    E. MCCONNAUGHY, JR.
John
    E. McConnaughy, Jr.


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  ROBERT
    E. NEDERLANDER
Robert
    E. Nederlander


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




    
Zane
    Tankel


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008




 


 


 


 


 




/s/  LEONARD
    TOBOROFF
Leonard
    Toboroff


 


    Director


 


    March 6, 2008







    96



Table of Contents


EXHIBIT INDEX

 



  
  
  
  
  





Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    2


    .1


 


    First Amended Disclosure Statement pursuant to Section 1125
    of the Bankruptcy Code, dated September 14, 1988, which
    includes the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of
    Reorganization dated September 14, 1988 (incorporated by
    reference to Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).




 


    2


    .2


 


    Reorganization Trust Agreement dated September 14,
    1988 by and between Registrant and John T. Grigsby, Jr.,
    Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit D of the
    First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
    September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).




 


    2


    .3


 


    Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of May 9, 2001 by and
    among Registrant, Allis-Chalmers Acquisition Corp. and Oil Quip
    Rentals, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to
    the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed May 15, 2001).




 


    2


    .4


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement dated February 1, 2002 by and
    between Registrant and Jens H. Mortensen, Jr. (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).




 


    2


    .5


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement dated February 1, 2002 by and
    among Registrant, Energy Spectrum Partners LP, and Strata
    Directional Technology, Inc. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 2.10 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).




 


    2


    .6


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement dated August 10, 2004 by and among
    Allis-Chalmers Corporation and the investors named thereto
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to the
    Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).




 


    2


    .7


 


    Amendment to Stock Purchase Agreement dated August 10, 2004
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the
    Registration Statement on
    Form S-1
    (Registration No. 118916) filed on September 10,
    2004).




 


    2


    .8


 


    Addendum to Stock Purchase Agreement dated September 24,
    2004 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.55 to
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 30, 2004).




 


    2


    .9


 


    Asset Purchase Agreement dated November 10, 2004 by and
    among AirComp LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Diamond
    Air Drilling Services, Inc., a Texas corporation, and Marquis
    Bit Co., L.L.C., a New Mexico limited liability company, Greg
    Hawley and Tammy Hawley, residents of Texas and Clay Wilson and
    Linda Wilson, residents of New Mexico (incorporated by reference
    to the Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on November 15, 2004).




 


    2


    .10


 


    Purchase Agreement and related Agreements by and among
    Allis-Chalmers Corporation, Chevron USA, Inc., Dale Redman and
    others dated December 10, 2004 (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.63 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 16, 2004).




 


    2


    .11


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement dated April 1, 2005, by and among
    Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., Thomas Whittington, Sr., Werlyn R.
    Bourgeois and SAM and D, LLC. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.51 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on April 5, 2005).




 


    2


    .12


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement effective May 1, 2005, by and
    among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., Wesley J. Mahone, Mike T.
    Wilhite, Andrew D. Mills and Tim Williams (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.51 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 6, 2005).




 


    2


    .13


 


    Purchase Agreement dated July 11, 2005 among Allis-Chalmers
    Energy Inc., Mountain Compressed Air, Inc. and M-I, L.L.C.
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 15, 2005).




 


    2


    .14


 


    Asset Purchase Agreement dated July 11, 2005 between
    AirComp LLC, W.T. Enterprises, Inc. and William M. Watts
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.43 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 15, 2005).




 


    2


    .15


 


    Asset Purchase Agreement by and between Patterson Services, Inc.
    and Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services, Inc. (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.44 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 8, 2005).





    97



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  





Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    2


    .16


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement dated as of December 20, 2005
    between the Registrant and Joe Van Matre (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual
    Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2005).




 


    2


    .17


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of April 27, 2006, by
    and among Bridas International Holdings Ltd., Bridas Central
    Company Ltd., Associated Petroleum Investors Limited, and the
    Registrant. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.3 to
    the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended March 31, 2006).




 


    2


    .18


 


    Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of October 17, 2006, by
    and between Allis-Chalmers Production Services, Inc. and
    Randolph J. Hebert (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 19, 2006).




 


    2


    .19


 


    Asset Purchase Agreement, dated as of October 25, 2006, by
    and between Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. and Oil & Gas
    Rental Services, Inc. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on October 26, 2006).




 


    2


    .20


 


    Agreement and Plan of Merger by and among the Registrant, Bronco
    Drilling Company, Inc. and Elway Merger Sub, Inc., dated as of
    January 23, 2008 (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 2.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2008).




 


    3


    .1


 


    Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Registrant
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).




 


    3


    .2


 


    Certificate of Designation, Preferences and Rights of the
    Series A 10% Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock
    ($.01 Par Value) of Registrant (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed February 21, 2002).




 


    3


    .3


 


    Amended and Restated By-laws of Registrant (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 3.3. to the Registrant’s Annual
    Report of
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2001).




 


    3


    .4


 


    Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation filed
    with the Delaware Secretary of State on June 9, 2004
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.3 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).




 


    3


    .5


 


    Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation filed
    with the Delaware Secretary of State on January 5, 2005
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.5 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed January 11, 2005).




 


    3


    .6


 


    Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation filed
    with the Delaware Secretary of State on August 16, 2005
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.5 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed August 17, 2005).




 


    4


    .1


 


    Specimen Stock Certificate of Common Stock of Registrant
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 2004).




 


    4


    .2


 


    Registration Rights Agreement dated as of March 31, 1999,
    by and between Allis-Chalmers Corporation and the Pension
    Benefit Guaranty Corporation (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).




 


    4


    .3


 


    Registration Rights Agreement dated April 2, 2004 by and
    between Registrant and the Stockholder signatories thereto
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.43 to Amendment
    No. 1 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2003).




 


    4


    .4


 


    Registration Rights Agreement dated as of January 29, 2007
    by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., the Guarantors named
    therein and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).




 


    4


    .5


 


    Registration Rights Agreement dated as of January 18, 2006
    by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., the Guarantors named
    therein and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).




 


    4


    .6


 


    Registration Rights Agreement dated as of August 14, 2006
    by and among the Registrant, the guarantors listed on
    Schedule A thereto and RBC Capital Markets Corporation
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).





    98



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  





Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    4


    .7


 


    Indenture dated as of January 18, 2006 by and among the
    Registrant, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank,
    N.A., as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1
    to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).




 


    4


    .8


 


    First Supplemental Indenture dated as of August 11, 2006 by
    and among Allis-Chalmers GP, LLC, Allis-Chalmers LP, LLC,
    Allis-Chalmers Management, LP, Rogers Oil Tool Services, Inc.,
    the Registrant, the other Guarantors (as defined in the
    Indenture referred to therein) and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).




 


    4


    .9


 


    Second Supplemental Indenture dated as of January 23, 2007
    by and among Petro-Rentals, Incorporated, the Registrant, the
    other Guarantor parties thereto and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as
    trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2007).




 


    4


    .10


 


    Indenture, dated as of January 29, 2007, by and among the
    Registrant, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank,
    N.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).




 


    4


    .11


 


    Form of 9.0% Senior Note due 2014 (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit A to Exhibit 4.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).




 


    4


    .12


 


    Form of 8.5% Senior Note due 2017 (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit A to Exhibit 4.1 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).




 


    10


    .1


 


    Amended and Restated Retiree Health Trust Agreement dated
    September 14, 1988 by and between Registrant and Wells
    Fargo Bank (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit C-1
    of the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization
    dated September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).




 


    10


    .2


 


    Amended and Restated Retiree Health Trust Agreement dated
    September 18, 1988 by and between Registrant and Firstar
    Trust Company (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit C-2
    of the First Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization
    dated September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s
    Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).




 


    10


    .3


 


    Product Liability Trust Agreement dated September 14,
    1988 by and between Registrant and Bruce W. Strausberg, Trustee
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit E of the First
    Amended and Restated Joint Plan of Reorganization dated
    September 14, 1988 included in Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    dated December 1, 1988).




 


    10


    .4*


 


    Allis-Chalmers Savings Plan (incorporated by reference to
    Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 1988).




 


    10


    .5*


 


    Allis-Chalmers Consolidated Pension Plan (incorporated by
    reference to Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 1988).




 


    10


    .6


 


    Agreement dated as of March 31, 1999 by and between
    Registrant and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended June 30, 1999).




 


    10


    .7


 


    Letter Agreement dated May 9, 2001 by and between
    Registrant and the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Quarterly Report
    on
    Form 10-Q
    for the quarter ended March 31, 2002).




 


    10


    .8


 


    Termination Agreement dated May 9, 2001 by and between
    Registrant, the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation and others
    (incorporated by reference to Registrant’s Current Report
    on
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 15, 2002).




 


    10


    .9*


 


    Executive Employment Agreement, dated April 1, 2007, by and
    between the Registrant and Munawar H. Hidayatallah (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on November 6, 2007).




 


    10


    .10*


 


    Executive Employment Agreement, effective April 3, 2007, by
    and between the Registrant and Victor M. Perez (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on November 6, 2007).





    99



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  





Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    10


    .11*


 


    Executive Employment Agreement, effective July 1, 2007, by
    and between the Registrant and Terrence P. Keane (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 24, 2007).




 


    10


    .12*


 


    Executive Employment Agreement, dated December 3, 2007, by
    and between the Registrant and Theodore F. Pound III
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 6, 2007).




 


    10


    .13*


 


    Executive Employment Agreement, effective July 1, 2007, by
    and between the Registrant and David K. Bryan (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on July 13, 2007).




 


    10


    .14*


 


    Employment Agreement, dated December 18, 2006, by and
    between the Registrant and Burt A. Adams (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 19, 2006).




 


    10


    .15*


 


    Executive Employment Agreement, effective January 1, 2008,
    by and between the Registrant and Mark C. Patterson
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on February 25, 2008).




 


    10


    .16


 


    Purchase Agreement dated as of January 12, 2006 by and
    among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc, the Guarantors named therein
    and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).




 


    10


    .17


 


    Purchase Agreement dated as of August 8, 2006 by and
    between the Registrant, the guarantors listed on Schedule B
    thereto and RBC Capital Markets Corporation (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).




 


    10


    .18


 


    Purchase Agreement dated as of January 24, 2007 by and
    among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc., the Guarantors named therein
    and the Initial Purchasers named therein (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 29, 2007).




 


    10


    .19


 


    Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of
    January 18, 2006 by and among Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.,
    as borrower, Royal bank of Canada, as administrative agent and
    Collateral Agent, RBC Capital Markets, as lead arranger and sole
    bookrunner, and the lenders party thereto (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on January 24, 2006).




 


    10


    .20


 


    First Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated
    as of August 8, 2006, by and among the Registrant, the
    guarantors named thereto and Royal Bank of Canada (incorporated
    by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).




 


    10


    .21


 


    Senior Unsecured Bridge Loan Agreement, dated December 18,
    2006, by and among the Registrant, Royal Bank of Canada, as
    administrative agent, RBC Capital Markets Corporation, as
    exclusive lead arranger and sole bookrunner, and the guarantors
    and institutional lenders named thereto (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current
    Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 19, 2006).




 


    10


    .22


 


    Strategic Agreement dated July 1, 2003 between Pan American
    Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina and DLS Argentina Limited Sucursal
    Argentina (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to
    the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on December 29, 2006).




 


    10


    .23


 


    Amendment No. 1 dated May 18, 2005 to Strategic
    Agreement between Pan American Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina and
    DLS Argentina Limited Sucursal Argentina (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.14 to the Registrant’s
    Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on December 29, 2006).




 


    10


    .24


 


    Amendment No. 2 dated January 1, 2006 between Pan
    American Energy LLC Sucursal Argentina and DLS Argentina Limited
    Sucursal Argentina (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.15 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
    Form 10-Q
    filed on December 29, 2006).




 


    10


    .25


 


    Investor Rights Agreement, dated December 18, 2006, by and
    between the Registrant and Oil & Gas Rental Services,
    Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the
    Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 19, 2006).





    100



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  





Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    10


    .26


 


    Investors Rights Agreement dated as of August 18, 2006 by
    and among the Registrant and the investors named on
    Exhibit A thereto (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on August 14, 2006).




 


    10


    .27*


 


    2003 Incentive Stock Plan (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 4.12 to the Registrant’s Current Report on
    Form 8-K
    filed August 17, 2005).




 


    10


    .28*


 


    Form of Option Certificate issued pursuant to 2003 Incentive
    Stock Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.41 to
    the Registrant’s Annual Report on
    Form 10-K
    for the year ended December 31, 2003).




 


    10


    .29*


 


    2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).




 


    10


    .30*


 


    Form of Employee Restricted Stock Agreement pursuant to the
    Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).




 


    10


    .31*


 


    Form of Employee Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement pursuant to
    the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).




 


    10


    .32*


 


    Form of Employee Incentive Stock Option Agreement pursuant to
    the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).




 


    10


    .33*


 


    Form of Non-Employee Director Restricted Stock Agreement
    pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).




 


    10


    .34*


 


    Form of Non-Employee Director Nonqualified Stock Option
    Agreement pursuant to the Registrant’s 2006 Incentive Plan
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on September 18, 2006).




 


    10


    .35*


 


    Form of Performance Award Agreement pursuant to the
    Registrants’ 2006 Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference
    to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on November 6, 2007).




 


    10


    .36


 


    Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of
    April 26, 2007, by and among the Registrant, as borrower,
    Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent and collateral
    agent, RBC Capital Markets, as lead arranger and sole
    bookrunner, and the lenders party thereto (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 10, 2007).




 


    10


    .37


 


    First Amendment to Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement,
    dated as of December 3, 2007, by and among the Registrant,
    the guarantors named thereto, Royal Bank of Canada and the
    lenders named thereto (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on December 6, 2007).




 


    10


    .38


 


    Amended and Restated Guaranty, dated April 26, 2007, by
    each of the guarantors named thereto in favor of Royal Bank of
    Canada, as administrative agent and collateral agent
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 10, 2007).




 


    10


    .39


 


    Amended and Restated Pledge and Security Agreement, dated
    April 26, 2007, by the Registrant in favor of Royal Bank of
    Canada, as administrative agent and collateral agent
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on May 10, 2007).




 


    10


    .40


 


    Credit Agreement, dated January 31, 2008, among the
    Registrant, as lender, BCH Ltd., as borrower, and BCH Energy do
    Brasil Servicos de Petroleo Ltda., as guarantor (incorporated by
    reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on February 6, 2008).




 


    10


    .41


 


    Option to Purchase and Governance Agreement, dated
    January 31, 2008, among the Registrant, BrazAlta Resources
    Corp. and BCH Ltd. (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on February 6, 2008).




 


    10


    .42


 


    Subordination Agreement, dated January 31, 2008, among the
    Registrant, Standard Bank PLC, BCH Ltd., BCH Energy do Brasil
    Servicos de Petroleo Ltda. and BrazAlta Resources Corp.
    (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on February 6, 2008).





    101



Table of Contents




  
  
  
  
  





Exhibit



 



Description




 




 


    10


    .43


 


    Form of Convertible Subordinated Secured Debenture (incorporate
    by reference to Schedule E to Exhibit 10.1 to the
    Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on February 6, 2008).




 


    10


    .44*


 


    Agreement, dated April 1, 2007, by and between the
    Registrant and David Wilde (incorporated by reference to
    Exhibit 99.1 to the Registrant’s
    Form 8-K
    filed on April 3, 2007).




 


    21


    .1


 


    Subsidiaries of Registrant.




 


    23


    .1


 


    Consent of UHY LLP.




 


    31


    .1


 


    Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to
    Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.




 


    31


    .2


 


    Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to
    Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.




 


    32


    .1


 


    Certification of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
    Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 1350, as adopted pursuant to
    Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.





 

 








    * 


    Compensation Plan or Agreement




    102






EX-21.1
2
h54724exv21w1.htm
SUBSIDIARIES OF REGISTRANT



exv21w1



 

Exhibit 21.1

LIST OF SUBSIDIARIES





 
 
 


Name
Jurisdiction of Organization




 
 
 


AirComp LLC

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers Holdings Inc.

 
Delaware


Allis-Chalmers Management LLC

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Production Services LLC

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Rental Services LLC

 
Texas


Allis-Chalmers Tubular Services LLC

 
Texas


DLS Argentina Limited

 
British Virgin Islands


DLS Drilling, Logistics and Services Company

 
British Virgin Islands


Elway Merger Sub, Inc.

 
Delaware


Petro-Rentals LLC

 
Louisiana


Rebel Rentals LLC

 
Louisiana


Strata Directional Technology LLC

 
Texas


Tanus Argentina S.A.

 
Argentina











EX-23.1
3
h54724exv23w1.htm
CONSENT OF UHY LLP



exv23w1



 

Exhibit 23.1

CONSENT OF UHY LLP
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM

We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-3
(Nos. 333-146638 and 333-139058), the Registration Statements on Form S-4 (Nos. 333-149326,
333-140302, and 333-136978) and the Registration Statements on Form S-8 (Nos. 333-139957 and
333-127092) of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. of our reports dated March 6, 2008, with respect to the
consolidated financial statements, financial statement schedule and the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting, which appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2007.
 

/s/ UHY LLP

Houston, Texas
March 6, 2008








EX-31.1
4
h54724exv31w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w1



 

EXHIBIT 31.1

CERTIFICATION BY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

I, Munawar Hidayatallah, certify that:

     1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.;

     2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;

     3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included
in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;

     4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:

          (a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to
the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;

          (b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control
over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;

          (c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;

          (d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial
reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth
fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and

     5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit
committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):

          (a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of
internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and

          (b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.

Date: March 6, 2008 By



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 

/s/ MUNAWAR H. HIDAYATALLAH
 
 

 
Munawar H. Hidayatallah                  
 

 
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman 
 


 






EX-31.2
5
h54724exv31w2.htm
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO SECTION 302



exv31w2



 



 
 
 
 
 


EXHIBIT 31.2

CERTIFICATION BY CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

I, Victor M. Perez, certify that:

     1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc.;

     2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;

     3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included
in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;

     4. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:

(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls
and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information
relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us
by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is
being prepared;

(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal
control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles;

(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures
and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure
controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation;

(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the
registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control
over financial reporting; and

     5. The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit
committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):




 
(a)
 
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and
report financial information; and


 

 
(b)
 
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.



Date: March 6, 2008 By



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 
                                              /s/ VICTOR M. PEREZ
 
 

 
Victor M. Perez               
 

 
Chief Financial Officer 
 


 






EX-32.1
6
h54724exv32w1.htm
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO SECTION 906



exv32w1



 



 
 
 
 
 


EXHIBIT 32.1

CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002

In connection with the Annual Report on Form 10-K of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. (the “Company”),
for the period ended December 31, 2007, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the
date hereof (the “Report”), the undersigned hereby certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350,
that:

(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934; and

(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the
financial condition and results of the operations of the Company.





 
 
 
 
 




Date: March 6, 2008 By:

 
 
 
 


 

 
/s/ MUNAWAR H. HIDAYATALLAH
 
 


 

 
 
 
 


 

 
Munawar H. Hidayatallah
 
 


 

 
Chief Executive Officer
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


Date: March 6, 2008 By:
 
 
 
 


 

 
/s/ VICTOR M. PEREZ
 
 


 

 
 
 
 


 

 
Victor M. Perez
 
 


 

 
Chief Financial Officer
 
 




 






GRAPHIC
7
h54724h5472402.gif
GRAPHIC

begin 644 h54724h5472402.gif
M1TE&.#EA40(%`<00`````/#P\.#@X-#0T'!P<&!@8#`P,*"@H+"PL%!04)"0
MD"`@(!`0$("`@$!`0,#`P/___P``````````````````````````````````
M`````````````````````````"'Y!`$``!``+`````!1`@4!``7_("2.9&F>
M:*JN;.N^<"S/=&W?>*[O?.__P*!P2"P:C\BD%V&F8F7F-?EI^$=H9O$'.(I8%\:X:LAE:1;U9C79BK
M5+Z_P,%%`0D`Q@0B"`S&``TBQ@@0`<9:S``&7P37(]8`R`T`8,L`#(/@Q@S1
MX`4B#LXC`P;,"5P.UN^LS`XD"0Q8`@P2/.BV2IL!;M:0D3@'P`&79B+`00!W
M$(*V?0[V@0%0K5<;:,\(PVXBY"DT!0F8!B&8CA:*+KUV?OQHY@
MNW4@N[`^Y6%98`"C1IHT2R@(J'9$1C0<%0#`@:`2Y!@5=KFTW5.A^[]F<%=$>>
M;1594AM9Z!GPE/\WELUVV@@&A`=`*9]M=$5[TD4WD`+S+12.)1B*`%\[>D$G
MP'X/DL#=`]Z!,\8CIT'6&T?E9\>-R.//981%CTZ>@:1Z,M@-DU#C``
M5`$'01>2,0X`DEH#\F!8(6+H#23`>A8&698U),0&EUXC%-,92LR(V"1YUD1)
MPI7<\#:1.^&YTZ"%*9Z(P#3ND3@;!`:HE=Q&8):0VH.X7?E?A%V:T*:4;7:A
MFXQ2H?,.1PX$**2/G';JZ0Q=C7!``,R-X!Q'"<`55#4%--``%M,L8!9AS:"%
M#5D(O.&66`.>>!Y&!7#Y6Y_2R0:G'%A(M-(;IZ48ZZQOU$K9*PD,B`#_%I2B
M-\`"!?SJ&IZZB7!1DGI5F)EH`P&2HJ$?#ON>;'[F5]D"@JV+F*UG6&N82=Z%VC)^!6UQLA>Z91`2B[VIZ]&NM,E@FG_1STV$D^
M]$;0FQKL]ML[`GU3,N.$Q=&)-V959H%+:5QLR>$,4'>?#*4S9SM`6E(E`%&Y
MG!\YT>2V"IH[)<"W;&'%UH?M)8UZ\I\D$VCWL
MPK-X5/$.&I-`!,4IXENY-_HY.:%_>"(RA*$$]_'(&V=+%H>@P<7,FC2/QB.@
MG&$&&VA(+PT9:U"2"#RA/%)"*R9LLGT:E;B2AQEP^-6(%]VS`H@`,*YO"!ZE
M7*('+U^0/\HBXZL)'ABA/_;)XG_2LY\`=@S!1B^P+WD6?""&,R@
M!C?(P0YZ\(,@#*$(1TC"$IKPA"A,H0I7R,(6NO"%,(RA#&=(PQJRH!A;(=3K
MT%"E!"0K+.M!P`*,<9_"'&9L?](:&(9HNT#(@P'O@-HJ1-,9OR$NBL"!G346
MX)XM&8-V$EB)F^K"!5MYB2?M<$8`EM(0\=GPCG@4@M3(
M,Y`%1`,Z@6/<`Q#`1G`(IBS7X4[$R%2QJH1Q7Q[Y#,-J%"+V"`2.4GR99`[4
M#LJH#F5!"1``5V0`V50+`CBC'P<@Y"'S2,QB[F`SOU$7;)`1H7#$AH+M00\HYU*9Q42N3`G8S",E%_K>Z$2@`$!D,ID,R&'B,C4A(;XR97[K1V">HC\O+21HSGAG"<(BSZ70
M8512$=L;\8E(O.D!H,9,J$)EP*C_#(20TV#+M[#D@(@!C8S.*)FKRM`>/2'_
MD6JNV5;GWL3(+Z7$(M%A$B<1"4X"$."5)[4&`]PC-P`L0'PZV0=Z+`I39D2+
M&3/]UL7.((\"/7*G@G$'V!;*U*:>X#>I\LY`^"2?<)BE$I2VCH5HE2+0^$0
M3>2T,0"31,M0^3CM<%1470Z7I$ULF1S$$+9>N_Q``C$4FE-GN,C5C+],4
M!'`[''N0!"(F\UE;Y,$VO1@T'P<`1UL=,)#*S/8S7JE+9&/2$"69\S(<&6>&
M@B*KC!Q@+H!Y98$=0+PH+B``I:$,7H(TW])J9(AD7'"#.\F%_,IC-2"U[LL@
MPA8)D[5MWDWQ#&';"P0HH&2LR"@^$."J03R@3P]H0(MK?(=7C4`!N;J8JS0Z
MU`-(E\]\SG/OOYSX`.M*`'3>A"
M&_K0B$ZTHA?-:$5[M:TBJ_]8N=SS@`1DRL:6+L`@YEO1LA#+(JTIP0`L'3GT
M%'%.10Q`L.#9:0=TQJN23L^FY_L4!VSEHN-S]0A>^K1+M#4!8=9#L`I@!P5D
M)-)YD76LV[IL3-]^$@
M9S`K.!YL<4,;UM:^M+CFBPS[B*B*%G1,`\"#Q&;0DDJ"^?DM@^(.5T4+KR65
MQC?_[1JR034=&4MYF.Z,0>D9N:J4V"HZG9.F.4,-<17V4.7$6E6,,`_$'40K
M2W(P=LB&N(H!0LOJ1GD"]#-@3#09_OD
MCVI5E&U6[9U1$AFU_M.J5PP]6>W#W<$.&X#IO.QT05DQUM:U!M"[:Y(9T;`R
M`WFOM*SX[JE+766[#ZIO1"I7!PH^7>4>OI0FV,AKG4YUU`RQO=G\/DZ<%2=:
M<3P$>$W2@?^B5%F;AFAH1J'?\%_L@6?M,"HOH[$JI^%6_[6U!@+!%^6A?]KP
M46,3`+;C?_0W4=$5@*L$!LZ0(N('*!J!%Y]13:P@$"GB(A;8=R$R/+NQ5$SB
M)!-12O367.!0"J6R%L362*7Q0\R2,BF"@/F@?SYA51JA+&/Q``S37-QP-L/!
M@"]#`/^7$0$X,6!G5(R3+VO#2!4R7=,E%8,Q2'C7,HP4A1/1341W?PVH6R45
M-'R'0?4U*^I`?JD%)9'C%0T1.3:E;>OG.&5B+./G&A(!$7`"',K0%_CG)W-X
M;HU$6.PQ`-J$2)DB@'@G).JG+Y\QB'@A7\>&1)^13(D8+V(A*/8F#4^4`,ID
M7_N0AO(0#:+1;8<1B?"4AI\1`/^?B%-"HHI+E4[)-"<8@TA^\R#F`C\)P(F>
M2`Z@N"^B^%&JR'KQ,4C>@78YMFH$1H=3,5-'J"^'F(AV\AAZHR^E<0U1Q#`/
M1RY)4A&#$B@6(HUJUU;ND8VH]7C5]X=$D2@8P8V=E@\4B(:P`7P]]PZ(:`]<
M9FRTHG5W15(I$!M32!:?L8?Y1";`D6-&$HA#XH^K!11APA3?ATA:XH3;M%+$
M6'T,-F%T9WR6:#02&5D5,CP/0(!=H'J!=X'UF#IX,T[%N"^G=Y*29T^"2'FT
M08-"^`T.,5/Z1#45XE,D28`*.4P;$9.06'W]8E5G9$X-T"H5I7E#M2H8$XUM
M(Y`3J53_HV&1#*A67I%/Q4=\<%$@7&-0-$&.VT=GK'``70F0'#&5#/D99[D*
M;+%?.4<80_>"JF-\$-D,$7,&P`%/ZY1TXU4.:H)2\6>8\^=
M:%$:6S%A"Z@L5`AFK]63W+`%AD&3DVD-:C$7EWD:F:D':.0:Q_(9;/$.Y\E=
M-,$6D6-S<+(M?0(GD8B=C3F:7`@'W$B4=?D&M"4UN%<'<(=[_U<0H/I(=&AF
MH$9WEL1R(MPX`*41=8T$H;$A=?77%,:`?>@!%&['?2K32-?$%@$W(7.!$JS2
ME/N%>&D7=G#1=G($,QWY*G1',B!*3MSU+>+(%:W!6R@)&Q>3%;0UF$?T&2CJ
M#RFIA6BGGRJJ)).7DM:S.B!"8_O@@,"15TWDBW-LGQ
M1%C@?$NA%M+Y>+.'BQOJD81Q#MJ9'R&*:R2J1;D;M/V/)8F$./6<0/`M@H%4$7&]FP/0`!]$BS;%G)D
M,VS%MFX$!VXW!G`QYVRSN@;T)2[(`#3$TI1]EVE>MJF0.B=
M!%L9T0!<8'#6NFON8:L6@:X?YR:J*BJ,5*RL0%\`*QU1DG'!-D<9D4.=^AG6
MNB4YM&]IE*H"QW"<)@T3IZXNEZJ?,:R#,+$-8VOUR@B-MK(OI+(L^[(P&[,R
M.[,T6[,V>[,XF[,ZN[,\V[,^^[-`&[1".[1$6[1&>[0;I!"C1FW>%HQ-^VY(
M&[52VP*[(A;_`^"*@()+:H$-HS:U7ONU*D`_&O&#&U46<586#W0>8[:V;-NV
M;ONV<!NW<CNW=%NW=GNW>)NW>KNW?-NW?ONW@!NX>%:S8QL194M?4?1`<:4*
MC-NXCONXD!NYDCNYE%NYEGNYF)NYFKNYG-NYGONYH!NZ:6!4-UNX`2N;R-D.
M)B"88-NZ*,"Z,KLU0'80X*0`[%"[$:BZKKN[*P"[,=LGI.)C);-D,4:\C\>[
MR/NZO.N[R0NVS&NTS]N\4QN]1$N]THNTUONRG3`]NW`"V7N]<..@(_2]C48`
MT]&=!#!R##9RQPN^("0XE?1!Y,MH%7$2JM0P][NZ[OM!\`L2(#2__XO6,!<5
M16?K7C<CN@B<P`J\P`S<P`[LP'5S$@\\P9E+NCD[:M-QN`6LO_O+00]0`,+D
MH`$BOSXKFT`C#0X1I678P1HT1^^05J(RPAP$P(IV8`JR@N"$P^!'PRQL'!\,
MM3%\D\C#PSM+Q#U\%'.DKBF@ED+\-D:<LT]\Q,$0KRZK`DQ\05%<NE+L-@(`
MPC5PQ4.\O%M<,+9[63$`6Y0*-UD\:(1D`%M!)3D,QSL\QI_2Q>!7`V@,Q)VR
MQH+F$%FKPB=\PNU+QSZR<V9\`[!%`%7L(WP<:`>0`.9;P!OL9%-)P99\R9B<
MR9J,P,;&(0N,`.G;%YN,P!:,L\#F;336#O^3_":$'#=E2P2)O,C&T<B`]H-J
MV0Y=K+NLW,K%46EZ#`2QO,<E[)1ED;[Y9,P<S,M(W`!*?`3!W".T#&C;"P8P
M`K71K,P[0,50\,S'<<TPZ\W8;`.JULQ-P,W$`<XLB\[A+`-E#`RP-8/G+,;K
M/`4"T''"T,7P?!366T\!K&U/NQ:N]F[J/,\L<!Z'_`M=[&_!P+R<.9>#>VBP
ME;5=R[4XI\L$S02CUL3W+%8''07,RRVNZ&+PPFCW(<F)2\FU.<HJO=(LW=*<
MNV\N?;E7H6,Q/;HLP!'3<'V,%F<F;=$^?=%&X,N>(@`<_0L??;X#1M+EAKJR
MF<Q`/0QB53!$K:__5,"\$7-3_\)H>H&[@.)BN8NV3UT$")#/4EW4'@T#FM#1
M@[:@S#RM;>W48?T#XYP\4ZW61<#0O4@:(\VS`SW/:BG+94W53?#1&6$?ZJ>S
M?8W-]7S'=)TJ=@T$S#LQ!O#+-IO8O*P`"JU!E2;82!#9U?#8@A9?__#6PWM9
MEDW'EZK1&51IGW;7-UT`7?G*B;9S+!+2MMO5MSW(<8T#AFQ"']S:0L"\G&:'
MA.805U"K[9"Z8'T^I;S;,?#!JOU!O^W:,<#8A*8=+]73R^T&BUO3WOW=X/VY
MA$33X=W2WA8@7N')HMO<3T5']&NX!'S2N^S<,O##,522Z$#9,\"\I/)$_Z>F
M:)H&-`)`T1)=T<M-WRXPUS(DI5_D`Y'MQKC&:*K&M`$-T,&HVPB^`MI,0_![
M*SW`O/(`;%S2LZ<MO7:,1UX%VC'PO,BY#-3FLR6>O.VL:-8;KRB&LS&^NR>N
MU6=LW96=X:B1V8B6O4>8:%=1D"2A#DD.UT">T2]+Y#=.:/`<R"F,PDP>UZXX
M*E']S<\=Y8,6*`9P$O&MRQJ5TN5]YFC.TD($):*<YF[^P.RM-6TE#XPV"-TR
MY@?^TV$-AT(1NRS`MHS&<&.-R_F+X6%=:4,4OT\>`S"V:"YEOL6LOLALZ!<]
MUC1UPS,+Y8W&S^Y#S=X;UVH)W#2KZ3`.U.\<W?\*E0;Z+0.D3N($73**S&>1
M\N$WW0U>3KCK3-2QWF>SS@/,R[@K*[[__,^4OL4?S-DJ9CZ]O@//&[S&*^&@
M1.`$7NP];.EZEF-L0YA!H0\.S@*"(ROTLNJ`EDTZAN<&7,EOGN[J;KD'P"WK
M_NY:`&8"X@ZY,@;SU5>@&^>WLS>,I@`<4NZJ+-^>L<6GWEW&M@QI`=A#X-F2
MPF@-41><FMQ-3>W-"^OB+D,UPB2K<``<(@7,&U2?NM>*%F=<S=44S[M$3=;&
M!(<,AE"^P+Q+T1<1$VJ*)@FD_=8GW[JUBNPVE/%8L3_ZW`)P00X/C>/@^]LJ
M?D)BX!E#>"VS+,_)^\C_HNY"I54MY(`)C-P"C^QJ4V_TO$LJ,OQ"8B#8E@9F
M"A_/*Q!U.U>EB$8JQ%O:Q6O:NYO(%X\\_^.R=35$"7\\D4TL$:/5P42[7HW;
M7YWC@I;R9T^/S/`J4'H&8J4]:GS3RGGK@38_4<+4NLS=7[OS26]!`F"<9^38
M,_S:%].8C-:TVJT7W`WOK-_25-+FK<_N39,>6@#ZMH[OL:^Y^NYPS+:R8F7N
M5RZT!];U/6(^M=I;Z`F/"^L'9T`Y18]!AL]49]$PTJZUP>^S8(_J/A!?%S,#
M8Q"5%D&9D9-C\OX]+4!D:$G"/;NTT3#L%9[S.)O(VO\#*W&A@8`)^/95+Y-P
M_SX&`M#P#)!YHJFZLJW[PK$\PPY]X[F^\[TOVW["(;%HA`D*!,%Q]C``HH#!
M0@I(G!J-PZ/;_(+#L:"X;#ZC3>0TN^T^#0B-`%KP8$(.C.A>&O"^!0KNK`T:
M'K85(BXRQCP4*-!]"4@V.%0!+!R8V-$Y6#6&-BJ*EHJ.G)"DEJB0FKX.'B1L
M'AU80@$\F#QPX:V,=.G"[C8,E[D:)Z<1*#D$.!`D%$-+MRI?B_D&'!0(]PS8
M)C@P"!/(J6+CC$L.!Q`T(:?+&]%N%:@EJ5G/\_L<`!P(T("`-QHC%#3`8H*`
M@P);'K#KQ^)/L`=:!D:1=G$CQXH>/Q8TTF#*D7@23__N>(:@&`0'%O5QTK(`
M),V:-F_BS*ES)\^>/G,2D.*`"\Z5!;IUB6(`6@,$/WD2</H4IZV+#!U@;;A1
M#L>-4G$QD%IS9=>R9L]R/;M1W#@`!J;:-(!RKA`!#D:P=)EW']V^)_[8*F!E
MP2]6`SX!8`#M+YH`#%BZL!.,K-6M&Q5X[/'`"F13(Z.$_&'2+VD5A^D\@_`L
M=>H4HTN_LH-0SCE65H(($-?GG@FG,"C"[8*P;(+$`SDZO(BY(NPBCH4:>=V<
M](*L`QH8,(```G;M?*?_9L7FX"T'&CG**8`XRH*T:M]K"1[,%XKG`#J#/P,<
M$!'I^?^WX-]TEJ3T45=<9;7_E#BX&,#`<K@H18M%MPWS66(1`=B/@!ERV%*'
M*PBP!Q=565;B1AXI(-5*#/41Q0GJ,=4`'@*(I\)@PP#3!88?8K,AC_GY>,UD
ME1W7@&!2=(.$15HH\8>%`&`E3%-=U/BCE>D$>65I60X"W'!II256"YLAJ0`>
MEEP2!4L*2+%4;5K"21J7<9ZB4'?;W?F=$`<XL-1=.`!#&9@75444+0)T=4*"
MH$&`P&!_0O"``@@U9$X#F-%'IZ9TS;DI(@B(HYH-JXVJ2*<K/"G,`,"1Z(`6
M!&`BA0(F/'D?K8IE]0X$B'*4BD=TD!E%`2L>Q\6.GB([UZG)!L*$#2^U!"T9
MO,XD_Y]'1UH115;;8G416[DRB95[\)%KU6T-6)NNNNNRVZZ[[\(+KUS,\O-L
M7M+J^4.JP_P#`&_T`@S;L@$GLBMO#N3CH6M&!"7%=OS^2[#$RDY\31#43!,-
M?@I7W+''H@S\<1CBH1-IE3")G++*;H2\\B`MNQRSS/G.;''--^/,`\PYF[$S
MSS]+[#/0/2`:"<U#(YVST$GGH)T"$:/,M-0W+SVU#'&@3)$!Y7+=M==?@QVV
MV&.37;;99Z.=MMIKDTV8U6_@:X+6\;K[--WM+G>WNF_IK2XD?>\->+KSOMU&
MW"A4?02TR83V2N(B-6[*XT5,7C@+!@0P@$*("[GQ*Y&74O_Y$.C:K(SHEJ>`
M@'DGG_[#XL:`#O(UI)M>.NJ(G/K'C!"9@,HN)^/PN@[HZ"[W'9S$[H0/OIN\
M"@J9YG!J)\A+XKMDP--`>X%X%+\K[]Z+MKPWQ!\O6<DZM'[["YT*L/503S2P
M@$`),-02,U`'[SD-T!P5P`+80>1_;U$==HY%@^3!@!D,>8;&[%>-73'`!YTB
MH`%&L#7Y):1^&J'%#K27@_99(B`"[,(%`T#`4W5*@<[`F/\`N"1S]"!]Z@N0
M9O#0$"8<@$\F0$K4<B"\&]A!#3DTV!"3$!`($`![RN-!/;B!CX.IP6TZZX&$
MC(1#'4*@`'89@!)GX,'@V;"(1[G_HC,:!;T;=*J)!Q/CBR0XPT,,;%)!L$@0
M:*<YS>CO!IJCG:N$88/V27$'"(R!2NZUEZB@4`@).`PQZGB`_RFA!U_4P:3X
M.$?L%,``NIJB#PJI!C[2:I#K>Z,AEO4TA=$QE)$J(P]^&#QG\!&4)IB49GRP
M16E)2W5/Z.(8.EF`35RRCMX@G`XFB8-36I(8;DMB#&UY%VG)<EDR).7">O#+
MA>BB*65TAA-]X$H:=',ED8I*,1X@!QS.JI7?*"-K5BBJ)6FBF3QX!BL(PAW5
M>6(`Z>R4,6EPS4:5TQS9!!4="L#+&JP3-:42ISDCE<?]45,0::P.--J'E49E
M1T:XZM0W_V40HJRTI$_.$NEAL&+`)>Z`HG?)4YYZ&#UK^ND`%K4!`C**Q"A)
M4I0L>*2X0FH``<Q4!'W:)"%ZH-+K9&<[6/DI=W3J@FE&U*6?>V@HG%K*V5GU
M9;:+*AN@.CRJ-B*K$L7J5H?AU8B>-7]"*BLL^ADZMKJ&6W*=*UWK:M>[XC6O
M>MTK7_OJU[]B9:.`'>Q@#:!2PB*VKWY*+&/U*MC&0I:N"UAL9"O+K<=:UK(1
M?"I7X=&YM=9.&6Z576AIV-GH?%898@U$6F\PVE"T%J*</2WE4LLXN'IFM6^(
M[0Q,PMNA_=818&6$;EE&UM(:P[<R."EMJYD#</1F==QI"#M4M__(Z1:`N6,:
M+@MTI3D'/`RZ<!#'=C1W71_NX``E"(!ZBO'=AYU`5^P%+_J86`+K,L$2V3V!
M=4N@7^VRX+4L>&^CI*LZ+:8"I`<^8R]S`*,#7&4HWPV)0$20@`2L5KF_,0#^
MGJHK[:UA5`NJT3/ZY%\I^?'#WC"/"?[!'3^](T'%","(4Z%2[O`&70^X,79`
MBE&L!(25YWT)`&PH*A-S$@<(^)\),*>Y.]*RR9E;)!:B?(..NH#&FUUD`.2R
MY,[\E,80"#,Q#UA,<F1Q.TE$&(U9H>4=*I7!H]3!`'(QYBE#N%'IO+/F;!&I
MS65/K&'&@I,38)<IQY<5A[[C2W$@YA3_S('+90X5F>L[VRSCHL._R*0JHV:#
MIJBF,]=-#>U(-P!.-U5104B`7#Q(AE9OI\+$0`$`F_HZVA'DT/J`\IY?L@"%
MV&#4<\J24\J9%UE"TX\^Y&X*:'2Q4!:;<TA4``$.8#3TYF`EN@B".'>H:$9&
M2T:6=C0TMHT`:I.N-8?+30X$O((@<`4FO%*4>AXV[T9?&2O[A0!FIJTZ%,A1
M;K(8-POL=9;B2&%<',&#016P"1!S[@$.4$"5RFPD+;@DB_I\^(I3!(%07:H+
MSNJ"#B5.<10\@DKWA&47D.)?S*A.`!Z'M`(`_9*)S\H&92[J5QWZ267[O"6R
MO#*S]R',H"^D_QG80<#`L=UN71#P@7F6-@,.@$]\WV"1I).&0T!8OZ`'X1ER
M=H&[5:!"+<`$PO^*A-CSP`R".P'J]WCT0*(Q7E1:`L#OGO,+CL3!%_S/[A!7
ME,#'J`6[T+SEN@@\%D`L@*CH\.*D<Y4X)+&-HR18"QPG2Q=<M04<$X`!^=4%
MGV9B@@70Y^8M2<W`N/02K+7$XX^&_<1C#6@G%+V:\"[!Z[B8A&YG2;>FIM$0
MY;`/.XDU2`]0S&2E!=0[\(;V%CYH@,7J^V'IRAE&[AVM$+!]=7Q0$C88HL+X
MN)2JLZ+LSBVX#*HM`PAW'E$KYIRAU4`1&DLB`0)!,?PE+G_"4]>G%?_$Q>A"
M_7',K14@AB$@=[C7OPS=K-G`=WU<_ND=^_7<F)V;%KW%+P4`$SB-!C["W^$>
MST%"3<V:"'P<TV$!>&%1\'10-J6(,P@41%`"3!!`BF`.UN$`NJ@$J*0<AG4@
M!CY-^S@%]:F`^J%``JB@$&;76^A0"2@A/CEAEBA?-[@?@GT<%SA#C=@`>-54
M!:[?WE&.))!%<MC%17C(`&Q-),'!UB3`/92:Q)$ADQR>#=3/IR7'-'""7*BA
MD6R2Q%W$_SE&YP4B[3`50Q@)PO20ZDV7"+CA/1P/^.E`$.W*I0#+YP51T5RB
M"(Z@#M!"`"#$[K28:DP*:I3B\`@2'MA"?@7_8B1RT"K"W94Q@28ZE"YDHB4N
MR>?MH%B!HM'0(BUN0B_2`2WJ(.X)`P>!HKC]73"&8BR&X0_4R`"83^8$`PJJ
MQOD8CZ))`B5$XS2N%Q.4@/GH@GBLRC626$5T8/4$P'ZD(R=PS_E421"ZF9NA
M0PU*(N/DWB`45\&(UCYV%6X17G,-07#!`)95%4"*`A)>%7*]6V8YY$-"9$3V
M%69))&(95D5&%F5A)&)1Y$;^U61Y)&-U9$CRU6:9ED"&CVKEHR#X8QH0Y`LH
MI%8QY-&@Y#W"SDH&0DNBP4N2G4Z>`4^>I`76I#SA(V@E`U!6'T+"%M\-)<\5
MI6HI92/$Y%C-Y#.J_X`X@F%4<8F?O9AW+)4OY,E7+IL.=%F+98>N<*59;@T2
M)14JZD"2E)C^9<4"1",6',!9.F,,$$!V;`*,$$!<@F52`>;3Y<!=:A);>D=W
MK!A6T&5+V>0-E*4:FM1=7E3O+,4]U)0![!D:,66`6<$@&:9WL<5V[)A8;M0(
M4-2_?!V+5"8",$!$T!B2;<LFX(IV6-L)&!J\\66DW%AL5A"MZ1L=Z%@^:D]-
M`9FBR%>-!>0.NHJHB`I#R=="!=18XH!=+!,V60*8[=`CF,#MH536O06_;0("
MA-=FEA@285,QQH#,-1G'D"=`R<U";4>WN998Z<H-\@:A.2<*Z%,[Y64,%/]`
M!,T!0&%A%C`!0931S@'!*.6BYL7$>M@9`VZ$+S`:J+$3PD"+.*T!M$09AXG'
M&DC#9H):A15"V.D<)ZP@O^V3D]!:K$'&;38*'';!QA0/)40BC=".KBG,J<W+
MB'9&EMB!L?T<3"2;5!7D2JYC(1A:D$H;).A*()G9!TT>`>%F"G0#B(Y=4)*;
M8[`:+2@`ZIU@$'QIEB;E#BCADV91-(@@%AP.9Q8F@61!3;$:4;F#7,C"VZDG
MY_#)MGA7FDB!'W&+>(!:*FR2MB&%$HY9-2[.^%'<OTR+?B;8R46+CB2J1;R#
M08FGA[#2+KC<*DFJ_9U`J\UH"L#/3V%'_`B`ZL#_BC#,'`HTW":87)6XGI`*
M'=`5*<<<$$[BZC^]SEU>F#EQF((ZP@NV!)YL`OFUF![N$"<N*%G>11".V2Y0
M6YA**U%YD6Y=TUYFTC/P`J`-49O*EAZE:(O=`RM@JO$,2Q1N:K@*90OL"TP6
MQ.)8!""&Q>FAX:)^G!Q($1G4'':0&#?<@^>)FP!YUSW,2Q>2JN=](L`NIX<,
M9[,-@"Z!&KKH'Q*A6!Y<PN(-A$)<7L3,JL$(T28D3,(,A<AJV@L8Y&QQ:RIT
M!BTL$M"Y8#'IPGZ)4\7&5V`%F6YER6',HA^I0FN0[,\&R52N+"7J1=14+,G^
MIPOL*0-<:CK1`C/E`1VL_\31/29-LFP@P@#LQ4%9;N=+2%S40(LYV447N!_'
M\$TW?9R1E:AJR$^3(0`4S5R*O(X!DH$N(M[#H@"H&,F\-E7%VI,(."`O$(3_
MV:VT42<+C5`0*6ZMJ96E:86X0<LFF$,DN0I].=TN"A5V.$LJ^$(7FF&>OH#_
MQ)NK0,(9@A?C:@SJPE>@18\97JY2F<,[T`(98,S2(E1VHLOLWL-X2L-/,0.<
M7JU5^L!1Q$\)\$D&!9W[_4]\`.)>"L3#M,8<;1(K]:'E$HK"Q.TLT:4^,!#T
M`N+A7>\F,9"_VIKG'2/]S`3IH$M-K>K-)J*.KL3X(JZC^0+Y,`&TXN\%/M<N
M!/\#:N"!89`,F8[)#MCC'U3/"=@C"J*CZ&89<T3*.^8O'NPO80;/_T:P\UAC
MC6`CNP**",R'"!@&]?2.SG;F$(P`.W0/M&9.I,P'<'`?',3P`B_P'QA&,)0`
MR1B/#/NO\6"P#9N&-U`"<%#HJ@#5,`ZC-,(F.D2C.1)O*:0L<44E(TPE:RDE
M4M8,%JM`%"^"3_;,<1WE%3<E4=ZD4287&)]Q5=;O&`^O*7`Q(GCQ,:"Q68FQ
M<T"P"/,P"M9@"/\!'#`!.K:P:CP?!E]-?=PH#H.P%T"K(),,/5;C[]0'.";P
M]?BP%WA#.8KA4]Z6&I="%>]6'1-!^,X8-"P0QP@@!#3_[S-%Z&.@<BN^9BWJ
ME[@UZ^;2E^0!TZNX$S:5ROVL$AH^@Q^RK-#IP\79G2BKJ(5I*2R\\2'$L1AH
M,:0U<Q@\\QIC+?_>4V\HJ\-N&S$\`/TT2C5LZ(4%G0=M0P,@KT6LE\/=[<-P
M'.+:P+G*A1T^S!R\3D/E03!+URG?D_!@V+H^L2@LLR%$,QA,<Q8,]!<4M)$V
MK!"$+S!QCNVF&M\@!8%46S$TK[%-"4MX4`G&<U00QBRX&(HF@-%(WK8Q"22^
M@X;B:B_K8GO=[S2P7JK5HL+*3;TF\U29,1WWXQ0O@H:%<J>R4DP/L\:2CJ7F
MQDOPC2Y8A"?)M-P\300]V[-Q_Y\`1-YRC)P"O-K:>HC-KF/*J<(0QQP$JJ@^
MSVNGYL$;7EH90R4G)^1!>Q9;K[3KM.RLF$-?KI>HXJI%Q"VZ9+//P4^G=2<"
MJ*'"="$=2%&2:+.TW2"MP"FCPEFOLH34,F("$`;MO&QGW)$N9K):;W(8[S1<
MC\()>]-1W51VS(I=X-3DH5PQ,`!>0,!&<0%+.`1@\]M28,ZS4:84E9@!/-QB
M*4R7#6/5V2!>EB96E,!>'J98[PH`O%B?S$IQNX2084]"(QWL\#0B>+)QP77K
MN#6]4'=`Z^-U'T)V\Z-G!PC;H'=ZJ_=Z>\U%L_?9M-=[HTT>RG?9N'=]CTWD
MXG?;[/^W?:^/X`!X@`LX3R3U@/N$W1CX3^1-@A,X@_O$WSAX@T?X3@CK0K.Q
M!RNSKKI!=Z/69YMW&M_TA3>8)ELW:%,QA]?6=HNX`U>5AAN.>!L">?^CBJ^X
MFTZB!G</CD?BXWY0LWD//*[7'5]92M!!CH!C2$P/)SAEC^_'+D#/.EXC`:/*
M:C%/R7!1LQ6$E&\V9&[C]U"BCX/PDF^YNTHYK^CB*R:K,"3C+&Y$!H]B"JQY
M)?JB)3K4,KJPDTOH,5X$"817ZTK.#LRV`\W!""&G-+10>/*X'IDD$A7#!L67
M$AC:100?689G52AA!I%!J=)!"[8Q@!:#F7=A-/CY6[10QFG_+@ZH$`-5@P(5
MZN7ND*YF29=!G:M@S@FESJ?1#Q6*M@HXQLF2*E)<$T3?8#>;&SYY=3;-7PK,
M0LQ](!.V3P@27OP(IRY(=,Z%,)?Y\ULYF/&1+!N!;$MX.]$]%ZOQUUK>18WL
MDX&ZI3I@F`(K*Q:"&D%0BIC/@!)TAHR(TS:@P%Z:+7R>^@VHD?V)J:)0;1(8
M'^X&2+N7$=,MO"^@ML(4*(8O3(,2AYJ\QQ^SA$KKPZAY(!(OH$O5T[2V!.W)
MWN9\VD"D&D07PC,@MDZ/Y:U>TI#&M7#Q7-G*""01U9+Q!GBG`K%VIR=TF@!4
M!^%PR<?.FI&PFG@@P#F,V25H.:WI_Q93N\2%\7:H9I*N\+Q"PP#I)(D<!"M1
M(0S"-K7$4S.O[X8CJ!30ZT,2<!BPL%HY4=0[#)YI8)@AR3Q$HTLWJ+8^;`LK
M8+6)LP#8'INM#K[6;Q?/\?;3L,/.79?-9FY]]D[V=1JFZF+1"Q)D5.SG/9K0
M/X+#/;>ON^MJW=*]0-'I+03OP3JQLM=(Q\_I+P1!_)35VGB[>J84D.E+_!-$
M2XBA20EFW'NRIX[^X5+AFW)3_?(V\WVS08.?_WG/M1-TQN=S3F>BNVFX2`K*
M\`:FSHGP7>SJ>?\$ZIGAI[6XP\2Y[8I"\$I#E+P%Z]&%BLJC$4[%8FK6S[P,
ML"\=))'\L_]"5<P$"#@!)$+FB::HHZ9LBP[/_(SP^3108`A0,H`H=(X'Y%'@
M^1J''*IA-+U0!\+)$!@D(%BM5J@XL:`0!,/X4EBG4I_#=XO+YW05NX[301H&
M`X+DT#-PL-?WYQ`(AV?BM+B"XD2`:&1U$&C5Z(BC>4)&<H+0IW,P,&#@D&!S
MM[B*UY@I:5!*:`(5@.@0I.GIN(`[P.<'86E`:#5PR:C'V5I'AFQPG&PE5B;*
M^1G7C&TRR!@V4.#0,!(@G@2A-9Z.FVN)."")>)+PBX`:=`^TYX!N4JFK0!!<
MY"#(<T#@P!\(`JAQ>^AH&\2)-S)1O"@G"L:-,"1RO,CKH\AL(T7_>O18,J7*
ME251LEQD\25$C3(ANJPY)R1.;#=WWCC9+JC0H42+&CV*-*G2I4R;.FW*X*G4
MJ4$-^***]>FIK%R71NT*]NB"K6'+"OUJ-BTB!C[;NGT+-Z[<N73KVKV+-Z_>
MO7S[^OT+.+#@P80+&SZ,.+'BQ8P;.WX,.;+DR90K6[Z,.;/FS9P[>_X,.K3H
MT:1+FSZ-.K7JU:Q;NWX-.[;LV;1KV[Z-.[?NW;Q[^_X-/+CPX<2+&S^./+GR
MY<R;.[\L8-D!3SEHT7H@X,%U0M,;Z`@P1-$P?P/@#!F!H($NAM@7'@BP<%AT
M[T:J,_3N?8]W[O11@/<4QC!/>.=##@3>_Z>`#2>`EV`WXIDPG0\!-!#@>4?H
M]%R&RS50Q'A((""``0^HD0T4#3`PPCQ%S`!!`0H\\(8)0R2@PP,+&#$$`D`D
M\(`!>3P`@!O9"%``$C,($.*(!`2`Q(M<S##0#`DL=$L3"1`"`"%LB'A/="_6
M`..(=Q"@@(Y'W)A"%:'\D)X".28@0!$]:$CG<F\44(9``2#9X4"UY%```N:P
ML&(09")I@X[4Y("&%&10!T4!6[!0ID$R%%E#G$;HXHF(V&43P!9"T,(%(+<\
M4L807_X`QWHG$!D&HQUE,P])!+A:9Z["]=C``B,`XP`A`BB0P!I_-H!``0H1
MNI\)"$BRGBDOD/_QPCA&0&H@C`QMX2.,!PY;[)\F+-#?%--J1&@.;+Q@8`'Y
M202?CWO0=$*@M%8+H4.Z[@M<H-7!N8,#"M#B(\`"08'*J5LZJP<Y?(A;@!L'
M$!*Q,D[4>F6LRPQL@KR>K,O(HJ(B\TD!"Z"*+"\42J'@,"F*FP(!4;!`9,4L
M'!`@OSKW%JH8R,`3*B*$_&P%%`K@2>@O[Z32C0,,-+QI'^\A@J?%.MP#(0,%
M7K5D/<'"C!8@B"AXP%8O"\#6"5%%4XC0@Q8SC"ZA?#UO.M9=-4P?I4B--CP[
M_PWX#:22!E[@AA^.>.**+\YXXXX_#GGD.B?D+#[IU/.'-P:18,0MI>#_0@B'
M_ISP#CI++I/0YY:_DTL\_QB$R#*P(\2.T)O?&K<"<"#PP$&7._#'057@,@S5
M+4N.O&X"U--Q`#S\$`00C;"P`)X'W)C)%U\\4=^D/XR0K1,AULW(&9],F_,+
M,EM$Z!90-)(*&_OL0ROW1XB:?/ZXE8E[`00(.HPK%4@/[6O1^L;1``'<`D,?
M^\3$6A2=&4"M`>ZJD23.5PU'<2@["!22P*;3*"*1H%D'$&`&$1BZF>EOA;;Q
MA0&2@"1+"&``\)G2]$:HA?=A:D]94,`=&LB"6YSJ?1-<50X0X$.2F.L!/#K"
M#C%8K&L]"PU02D<-%U*M*C:0A5R$#?R0,0(@_\S)37%R(@F0,00)DLX*S[,?
M$[/AKA2*ST>\<`+ST%>-Y['O$P\P'Y'P=04?N$D*A.Q$][J(R-;HSED/T!'P
MTB$./=S#=*PBQ<]HYT/ZD<YXFSM""2R)B'VPCA1#LX(\9$<-A5S2E)W$78L"
M=)!21/($U(AEZ8Z7R%SJ<I>\[*4O?PG,8`ISF!^1`8MT\8#U,$D1Y>E&"M:#
M)!KH8H8FR$XR8T`#AI3#!\;<9CJ<R0AZ=6,&Y:!!J\2Y@QJ\2@5,LH$,JJE.
M:1)SGHI!(!%(0``"X$E'?,!BU>Z`A!U@@5Q,,($X:N&N*8D!/_RXT`CY(`,=
M`*!1M\AG"5;@'5EXB_\,Q2*`O!9D@`VV2'8"[54-\QDG#NG'?_1LJ6%`A@4!
MQ30`A$@/TU:!K"*1)&"5(D-Z,E@+X%VLFD72P2D^(;-NX.H%1,K$=)PEGCUI
M00!().F>YG732KFR:B[M:F!`]XEPT&BG+:J"EEH0+@A\A3L)P1,?%L`T*2"B
M:&&ZIQ0N-C%"04@G2[P*,-"YR?J0M!O>&^&U#NO5Q/YE70.`98]LL*20JK05
M6]0@%J!01J#.RUM#*NHG$N`CG3:6I$SU[%X9Z9\!.O29Z,AJ\/RDV-CN!60(
MX1!\QA&L2ED*@33Q!$'50XVJ7BM]^(G@"!^JT7L"*6`$X%!\+"L#%.)3$GM:
MBD(`R!6C1M#BN@12%`%2R@+7R7:\=W&5+MYI@F5^,[TS/!(*%!C.(RFH/.X\
M@3$SY<UN[H";X$P'.O7+I"KZE[T+4N=^7Y=.<@Z8/=XDKX,E]Z`'2WC"SPD!
"`#L_
`
end
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
</SEC-DOCUMENT>
-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
