item 1a. risk factors as a result of significant losses in recent years, our financial condition has been materially weakened. we incurred significant losses in 2001 2005, which materially weakened our financial condition. we lost 892 million in 2005, 821 million in 2004, 1.3 billion in 2003, 3.5 billion in 2002 and 1.6 billion in 2001. although we earned a profit of 356 million in 2007 and 164 million in 2006, we lost 2.5 billion in 2008 which included a 1.0 billion impairment charge , 754 million in the six months ended june 30, 2009. because of our weakened financial condition, we are vulnerable both to the impact of unexpected events such as terrorist attacks or spikes in jet fuel prices and to deterioration of the operating environment such as a deepening of the current global recession or significant increased competition . the severe global economic downturn has resulted in weaker demand for air travel and lower investment asset returns, which may have a significant negative impact on us. we are experiencing significantly weaker demand for air travel driven by the severe downturn in the global economy. many of the countries we serve are experiencing economic slowdowns or recessions. we began to experience weakening demand late in 2008, and this weakness has continued in 2009. we reduced capacity in 2008, and in 2009 we have announced additional reductions to our capacity plan for this year. if the global economic downturn persists or worsens, demand for air travel may continue to weaken. no assurance can be given that capacity reductions or other steps we may take will be adequate to offset the effects of reduced demand. the economic downturn has resulted in broadly lower investment asset returns and values, and our pension assets suffered a material decrease in value in 2008 related to broader stock market declines, which will result in higher pension expense in 2009 and future years and higher required contributions in future years. in addition, under these unfavorable economic conditions, the amount of the cash reserves we are required to maintain under our credit card processing agreements may increase substantially. these issues individually or collectively may have a material adverse impact on our liquidity. also, disruptions in the capital markets and other sources of funding may make it impossible for us to obtain necessary additional funding or make the cost of that funding prohibitive. we face numerous challenges as we seek to maintain sufficient liquidity, and we will need to raise substantial additional funds. we may not be able to raise those funds, or to do so on acceptable terms. we have significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years, including significant pension funding obligations. for example, in 2009 we will be required to make approximately 1.3 billion of principal payments on long term debt and payments on capital leases, and we expect to make approximately 1.6 billion of capital expenditures. in addition, the global economic downturn, potential increases in the amount of required reserves under credit card processing agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral on fuel hedging contracts have negatively impacted, and may in the future negatively impact, our liquidity. to meet our commitments and to maintain sufficient liquidity as we continue to implement our restructuring and cost reduction initiatives, we will need continued access to substantial additional funding. moreover, while we have arranged financings that, subject to certain terms and conditions including, in the case of one of the financing arrangements covering twelve aircraft, a condition that, at the time of borrowing, we have a certain amount of unrestricted cash and short term investments , cover all of our 2009 2011 aircraft delivery commitments through 2011, we will also need to raise substantial additional funds to meet our commitments to purchase aircraft and execute our fleet replacement plan. our ability to obtain future financing is limited by the value of our unencumbered assets. a very large majority of our aircraft assets including most of our aircraft eligible for the benefits of section 1110 are encumbered. also, the market value of our aircraft assets has declined in recent years, and may continue to decline. since the terrorist attacks of september 2001 the terrorist attacks , our credit ratings have been lowered to significantly below investment grade. these reductions have increased our borrowing costs and otherwise adversely affected borrowing terms, and limited borrowing options. additional reductions in our credit ratings might have other effects on us, such as further increasing borrowing or other costs or further restricting our ability to raise funds. a number of other factors, including our financial results in recent years, our substantial indebtedness, the difficult revenue environment we face, our reduced credit ratings, recent historically high fuel prices, and the financial difficulties experienced in the airline industry, adversely affect the availability and terms of funding for us. in addition, the global economic downturn and recent severe disruptions in the capital markets and other sources of funding have resulted in greater volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit spreads, and substantially more limited availability of funding. as a result of these and other factors, although we believe we can access sufficient liquidity to fund our operations and obligations for the remainder of 2009, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so. an inability to obtain necessary additional funding on acceptable terms would have a material adverse impact on us and on our ability to sustain our operations. the amount of the reserves we are required to maintain under our credit card processing agreements could increase substantially, which would materially adversely impact our liquidity. american has agreements with a number of credit card companies and processors to accept credit cards for the sale of air travel and other services. under certain of american s current credit card processing agreements, the related credit card company or processor may hold back, under certain circumstances, a reserve from american s credit card receivables. under one such agreement, which was recently amended, the amount of such reserve generally is based on the amount of unrestricted cash not including undrawn credit facilities held by the company and the processor s exposure to the company under the agreement. given the volatility of fuel prices and revenues, uncertainty in the capital markets and uncertainty about other sources of funding, and other factors, it is difficult to forecast the required amount of such reserve at any time. the amount of the reserve was 154 million as of june 30, 2009. the agreement limits the maximum amount of the reserve determined as described above during the period ending february 15, 2010, and the company currently estimates such maximum amount during that period to be approximately 300 million. however, if current conditions persist, absent a waiver or modification of the agreement, such required amount could be substantially greater after such period. our initiatives to generate additional revenues and to reduce our costs may not be adequate or successful. as we seek to improve our financial condition, we must continue to take steps to generate additional revenues and to reduce our costs. although we have a number of initiatives underway to address our cost and revenue challenges, some of these initiatives involve changes to our business which we may be unable to implement. in addition, we expect that, as time goes on, it will be progressively more difficult to identify and implement significant revenue enhancement and cost savings initiatives. the adequacy and ultimate success of our initiatives to generate additional revenues and reduce our costs are not known at this time and cannot be assured. moreover, whether our initiatives will be adequate or successful depends in large measure on factors beyond our control, notably the overall industry environment, including passenger demand, yield and industry capacity growth, and fuel prices. it will be very difficult for us to continue to fund our obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return to profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve substantially or if fuel prices were to increase and persist for an extended period at high levels. we may be adversely affected by increases in fuel prices, and we would be adversely affected by disruptions in the supply of fuel. our results are very significantly affected by the volatile price and the availability of jet fuel, which are in turn affected by a number of factors beyond our control. fuel prices have only recently declined from historic high levels. due to the competitive nature of the airline industry, we may not be able to pass on increased fuel prices to customers by increasing fares. although we had some success in raising fares and imposing fuel surcharges in reaction to recent high fuel prices, these fare increases and surcharges did not keep pace with the extraordinary increases in the price of fuel that occurred in 2007 and 2008. furthermore, even though fuel prices have declined significantly from their recent historic high levels, reduced demand or increased fare competition, or both, and resulting lower revenues may offset any potential benefit of these lower fuel prices. while we do not currently anticipate a significant reduction in fuel availability, dependence on foreign imports of crude oil, limited refining capacity and the possibility of changes in government policy on jet fuel production, transportation and marketing make it impossible to predict the future availability of jet fuel. if there are additional outbreaks of hostilities or other conflicts in oil producing areas or elsewhere, or a reduction in refining capacity due to weather events, for example , or governmental limits on the production or sale of jet fuel, there could be a reduction in the supply of jet fuel and significant increases in the cost of jet fuel. major reductions in the availability of jet fuel or significant increases in its cost would have a material adverse impact on us. we have a large number of older aircraft in our fleet, and these aircraft are not as fuel efficient as more recent models of aircraft. we believe it is imperative that we continue to execute our fleet renewal plans. however, due to the recent machinist strike at boeing, deliveries of the boeing 737 800 aircraft we currently have on order have been delayed. in addition, we expect delays in the deliveries of the boeing 787 9 aircraft we currently have on order. while we seek to manage the risk of fuel price increases by using derivative contracts, there can be no assurance that, at any given time, we will have derivatives in place to provide any particular level of protection against increased fuel costs. in addition, a deterioration of our financial position could negatively affect our ability to enter into derivative contracts in the future. moreover, declines in fuel prices below the levels established in derivative contracts may require us to post cash collateral to secure the loss positions on such contracts, and if such contracts close when fuel prices are below the applicable levels, we would be required to make payments to close such contracts these payments would be treated as additional fuel expense. our indebtedness and other obligations are substantial and could adversely affect our business and liquidity. we have and will continue to have significant amounts of indebtedness, obligations to make future payments on aircraft equipment and property leases, and obligations under aircraft purchase agreements, as well as a high proportion of debt to equity capital. in 2009, we will be required to make approximately 1.3 billion of principal payments on long term debt and payments on capital leases. we expect to incur substantial additional debt including secured debt and lease obligations in the future. we also have substantial pension funding obligations. our substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important consequences. for example, they limit our ability to obtain additional funding for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and general corporate purposes, and adversely affect the terms on which such funding can be obtained require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to payments on our indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the funds available for other purposes make us more vulnerable to economic downturns and limit our ability to withstand competitive pressures and reduce our flexibility in responding to changing business and economic conditions. we may be unable to comply with our financial covenants. american has a 433 million secured bank term loan facility the credit facility with a final maturity on december 17, 2010. the credit facility contains a liquidity covenant the liquidity covenant and a covenant that requires amr to maintain certain minimum ratios of cash flow to fixed charges the ebitdar covenant . we were in compliance with the liquidity covenant as of june 30, 2009. in june 2009, amr and american entered into an amendment to the credit facility which waived compliance with the ebitdar covenant for the quarter ended june 30, 2009 however, even absent this waiver we would have complied with this covenant as of june 30, 2009. in addition, the amendment reduced the minimum ratios amr is required to satisfy to 0.95 to 1.00 for the one, two and three quarter periods ending september 30, 2009, december 31, 2009 and march 31, 2010, respectively, to 1.00 to 1.00 for the four quarter period ending june 30, 2010, and to 1.05 to 1.00 for the four quarter period ending september 30, 2010. given the volatility of fuel prices and revenues, uncertainty in the capital markets and uncertainty about other sources of funding, and other factors, it is difficult to assess whether we will be able to continue to comply with the liquidity covenant and the ebitdar covenant, and there are no assurances that we will be able to do so. failure to comply with these covenants would result in a default under the credit facility which if we did not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or otherwise mitigate, the default could result in a default under a significant amount of our other debt and lease obligations, and otherwise have a material adverse impact on us and our ability to sustain our operations. our business is affected by many changing economic and other conditions beyond our control, and our results of operations tend to be volatile and fluctuate due to seasonality. our business and our results of operations are affected by many changing economic and other conditions beyond our control, including, among others actual or potential changes in international, national, regional and local economic, business and financial conditions, including recession, inflation, higher interest rates, wars, terrorist attacks or political instability changes in consumer preferences, perceptions, spending patterns or demographic trends changes in the competitive environment due to industry consolidation and other factors actual or potential disruptions to the air traffic control systems increases in costs of safety, security and environmental measures outbreaks of diseases that affect travel behavior and weather and natural disasters. as a result, our results of operations tend to be volatile and subject to rapid and unexpected change. in addition, due to generally greater demand for air travel during the summer, our revenues in the second and third quarters of the year tend to be stronger than revenues in the first and fourth quarters of the year. the airline industry is fiercely competitive and may undergo further consolidation or changes in industry alliances, and we are subject to increasing competition. service over almost all of our routes is highly competitive and fares remain at low levels by historical standards. we face vigorous, and, in some cases, increasing, competition from major domestic airlines, national, regional, all cargo and charter carriers, foreign air carriers, low cost carriers and, particularly on shorter segments, ground and rail transportation. we also face increasing and significant competition from marketing operational alliances formed by our competitors. the percentage of routes on which we compete with carriers having substantially lower operating costs than ours has grown significantly over the past decade, and we now compete with low cost carriers on a large majority of our domestic non stop mainline network routes. certain airline alliances have been granted immunity from antitrust regulations by governmental authorities for specific areas of cooperation, such as joint pricing decisions. to the extent alliances formed by our competitors can undertake activities that are not available to us, our ability to effectively compete may be hindered. pricing decisions are significantly affected by competition from other airlines. fare discounting by competitors historically has had a negative effect on our financial results because we must generally match competitors fares, since failing to match would result in even less revenue. we have faced increased competition from carriers with simplified fare structures, which are generally preferred by travelers. any fare reduction or fare simplification initiative may not be offset by increases in passenger traffic, reduction in cost or changes in the mix of traffic that would improve yields. moreover, decisions by our competitors that increase or reduce overall industry capacity, or capacity dedicated to a particular domestic or foreign region, market or route, can have a material impact on related fare levels. there have been numerous mergers and acquisitions within the airline industry and numerous changes in industry alliances. recently, two of our largest competitors, delta air lines, inc. and northwest airlines corporation, merged, and the combined entity became the largest scheduled passenger airline in the world in terms of available seat miles and revenue passenger miles. in addition, another two of our largest competitors, united air lines, inc. and continental airlines, inc., recently announced that they had entered into a framework agreement to cooperate extensively and under which continental would join the global alliance of which united, lufthansa and certain other airlines are members. in the future, there may be additional mergers and acquisitions, and changes in airline alliances, including those that may be undertaken in response to the merger of delta and northwest or other developments in the airline industry. any airline industry consolidation or changes in airline alliances could substantially alter the competitive landscape and result in changes in our corporate or business strategy. we regularly assess and explore the potential for consolidation in our industry and changes in airline alliances, our strategic position and ways to enhance our competitiveness, including the possibilities for our participation in merger activity. consolidation involving other participants in our industry could result in the formation of one or more airlines with greater financial resources, more extensive networks, and or lower cost structures than exist currently, which could have a material adverse effect on us. for similar reasons, changes in airline alliances could also adversely affect our competitive position. in 2008, we entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing arrangements with british airways and iberia, providing for commercial cooperation on flights between north america and most countries in europe, pooling and sharing of certain revenues and costs, expanded codesharing, enhanced frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in other areas. along with these carriers and certain other carriers, we have applied to the u.s. department of transportation for antitrust immunity for this planned cooperation. implementation of this agreement and the related arrangements is subject to conditions, including various u.s. and foreign regulatory approvals, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and commercial arrangements, and other approvals. agencies from which such approvals must be obtained may impose requirements or limitations as a condition of granting any such approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes, gates, slots or other assets. no assurances can be given as to any arrangements that may ultimately be implemented or any benefits that we may derive from such arrangements. we compete with reorganized carriers, which results in competitive disadvantages for us. we must compete with air carriers that have reorganized under the protection of chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code in recent years, including united, delta, northwest and u.s. airways. it is possible that other significant competitors may seek to reorganize in or out of chapter 11. successful reorganizations by other carriers present us with competitors with significantly lower operating costs and stronger financial positions derived from renegotiated labor, supply, and financing contracts. these competitive pressures may limit our ability to adequately price our services, may require us to further reduce our operating costs, and could have a material adverse impact on us. fares are at low levels and our reduced pricing power adversely affects our ability to achieve adequate pricing, especially with respect to business travel. our passenger yield remains very low by historical standards. we believe that this is due in large part to a corresponding decline in our pricing power. our reduced pricing power is the product of several factors including greater cost sensitivity on the part of travelers particularly business travelers pricing transparency resulting from the use of the internet greater competition from low cost carriers and from carriers that have recently reorganized under the protection of chapter 11 other carriers being well hedged against rising fuel costs and able to better absorb high jet fuel prices and fare simplification efforts by certain carriers. we believe that our reduced pricing power could persist indefinitely. our corporate or business strategy may change. in light of the rapid changes in the airline industry, we evaluate our assets on an ongoing basis with a view to maximizing their value to us and determining which are core to our operations. we also regularly evaluate our corporate and business strategies, and they are influenced by factors beyond our control, including changes in the competitive landscape we face. our corporate and business strategies are, therefore, subject to change. beginning in late 2007 and continuing into 2008, amr, american s parent company, conducted a strategic value review involving, among other things, amr eagle, american beacon advisors, inc., amr s investment advisory subsidiary american beacon advisors and aadvantage, our frequent flyer program. the purpose of the review was to determine whether there existed the potential for unlocking additional stockholder value with respect to one or more of these strategic assets through some type of separation transaction. as a result of this review, amr announced in late 2007 that it planned to divest amr eagle however, in mid 2008 amr announced that, given the then current industry environment, amr had decided to place that planned divestiture on hold until industry conditions are more favorable and stable. also pursuant to the review, amr sold american beacon advisors to a third party in september 2008 amr maintained a minority equity stake . in the future, amr may consider and engage in discussions with third parties regarding the divestiture of amr eagle and other separation transactions, and may decide to proceed with one or more such transactions. there can be no assurance that amr will complete any separation transactions, that any announced plans or transactions will be consummated, or as to the impact of these transactions on stockholder value or on us. our business is subject to extensive government regulation, which can result in increases in our costs, disruptions to our operations, limits on our operating flexibility, reductions in the demand for air travel, and competitive disadvantages. airlines are subject to extensive domestic and international regulatory requirements. many of these requirements result in significant costs. for example, the faa from time to time issues directives and other regulations relating to the maintenance and operation of aircraft. compliance with those requirements drives significant expenditures and has in the past, and may in the future, cause disruptions to our operations. in addition, the ability of u.s. carriers to operate international routes is subject to change because the applicable arrangements between the united states and foreign governments may be amended from time to time, or because appropriate slots or facilities are not made available. moreover, additional laws, regulations, taxes and airport rates and charges have been enacted from time to time that have significantly increased the costs of airline operations, reduced the demand for air travel or restricted the way we can conduct our business. for example, the aviation and transportation security act, which became law in 2001, mandated the federalization of certain airport security procedures and resulted in the imposition of additional security requirements on airlines. in addition, many aspects of our operations are subject to increasingly stringent environmental regulations, and concerns about climate change, in particular, may result in the imposition of additional regulation. for example, the u.s. congress is considering climate change legislation, and the european union the eu has approved a proposal that will put a cap on carbon dioxide emissions for all flights into and out of the eu effective in 2012. laws or regulations similar to those described above or other u.s. or foreign governmental actions in the future may adversely affect our business and financial results. the results of our operations, demand for air travel, and the manner in which we conduct our business each may be affected by changes in law and future actions taken by governmental agencies, including changes in law which affect the services that can be offered by airlines in particular markets and at particular airports the granting and timing of certain governmental approvals including foreign government approvals needed for codesharing alliances and other arrangements with other airlines restrictions on competitive practices for example court orders, or agency regulations or orders, that would curtail an airline s ability to respond to a competitor the adoption of regulations that impact customer service standards for example new passenger security standards, passenger bill of rights restrictions on airport operations, such as restrictions on the use of takeoff and landing slots at airports or the auction of slot rights currently or previously held by us or the adoption of more restrictive locally imposed noise restrictions. in addition, the air traffic control atc system, which is operated by the faa, is not successfully managing the growing demand for u.s. air travel. u.s. airlines carry about 740 million passengers a year and are forecasted to accommodate a billion passengers annually by 2015. air traffic controllers rely on outdated technologies that routinely overwhelm the system and compel airlines to fly inefficient, indirect routes. we support a common sense approach to atc modernization that would allocate cost to all atc system users in proportion to the services they consume. the reauthorization by the u.s. congress of legislation that funds the faa, which includes proposals regarding upgrades to the atc system, is pending, but it is uncertain when any such legislation will be enacted. we could be adversely affected by conflicts overseas or terrorist attacks. actual or threatened u.s. military involvement in overseas operations has, on occasion, had an adverse impact on our business, financial position including access to capital markets and results of operations, and on the airline industry in general. the continuing conflicts in iraq and afghanistan, or other conflicts or events in the middle east or elsewhere, may result in similar adverse impacts. the terrorist attacks had a material adverse impact on us. the occurrence of another terrorist attack whether domestic or international and whether against us or another entity could again have a material adverse impact on us. our international operations could be adversely affected by numerous events, circumstances or government actions beyond our control. our current international activities and prospects could be adversely affected by factors such as reversals or delays in the opening of foreign markets, exchange controls, currency and political risks, environmental regulation, taxation and changes in international government regulation of our operations, including the inability to obtain or retain needed route authorities and or slots. for example, the open skies air services agreement between the united states and the eu which took effect in march 2008 provides airlines from the united states and eu member states open access to each other s markets, with freedom of pricing and unlimited rights to fly beyond the united states and any airport in the eu including london s heathrow airport. the agreement has resulted in american facing increased competition in these markets, including heathrow, where we have lost market share. we could be adversely affected by an outbreak of a disease that affects travel behavior. in the second quarter of 2009, there was an outbreak of the h1n1 virus which had an adverse impact throughout our network but primarily on our operations to and from mexico. in 2003, there was an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome sars , which had an adverse impact primarily on our asia operations. in addition, in the past there have been concerns about outbreaks or potential outbreaks of other diseases, such as avian flu. any outbreak of a disease including a worsening of the outbreak of the h1n1 virus that affects travel behavior could have a material adverse impact on us. in addition, outbreaks of disease could result in quarantines of our personnel or an inability to access facilities or our aircraft, which could adversely affect our operations. our labor costs are higher than those of our competitors. wages, salaries and benefits constitute a significant percentage of our total operating expenses. in 2008, they constituted approximately 23 percent of our total operating expenses. all of the major hub and spoke carriers with whom american competes have achieved significant labor cost savings through or outside of bankruptcy proceedings. we believe american s labor costs are higher than those of its primary competitors, and it is unclear how long this labor cost disadvantage may persist. we could be adversely affected if we are unable to have satisfactory relations with any unionized or other employee work group. our operations could be adversely affected if we fail to have satisfactory relations with any labor union representing our employees. in addition, any significant dispute we have with, or any disruption by, an employee work group could adversely impact us. moreover, one of the fundamental tenets of our strategic turnaround plan is increased union and employee involvement in our operations. to the extent that we are unable to have satisfactory relations with any unionized or other employee work group, our ability to execute our strategic plans could be adversely affected. american is currently in mediated negotiations with each of its three major unions regarding amendments to their respective labor agreements. the negotiations process in the airline industry typically is slow and sometimes contentious. the union that represents american s pilots has recently filed a number of grievances, lawsuits and complaints, most of which american believes are part of a corporate campaign related to the union s labor agreement negotiations with american. while american is vigorously defending these claims, unfavorable outcomes of one or more of them could require american to incur additional costs, change the way it conducts some parts of its business, or otherwise adversely affect us. our insurance costs have increased substantially and further increases in insurance costs or reductions in coverage could have an adverse impact on us. we carry insurance for public liability, passenger liability, property damage and all risk coverage for damage to our aircraft. as a result of the terrorist attacks, aviation insurers significantly reduced the amount of insurance coverage available to commercial air carriers for liability to persons other than employees or passengers for claims resulting from acts of terrorism, war or similar events war risk coverage . at the same time, these insurers significantly increased the premiums for aviation insurance in general. the u.s. government has agreed to provide commercial war risk insurance for u.s. based airlines through september 30, 2009, covering losses to employees, passengers, third parties and aircraft. if the u.s. government does not provide such insurance at any time beyond that date, or reduces the coverage provided by such insurance, we will attempt to purchase similar coverage with narrower scope from commercial insurers at an additional cost. to the extent this coverage is not available at commercially reasonable rates, we would be adversely affected. while the price of commercial insurance had declined since the period immediately after the terrorist attacks, in the event commercial insurance carriers further reduce the amount of insurance coverage available to us, or significantly increase its cost, we would be adversely affected. we may be unable to retain key management personnel. since the terrorist attacks, a number of our key management employees have elected to retire early or leave for more financially favorable opportunities at other companies, both within and outside of the airline industry. there can be no assurance that we will be able to retain our key management employees. any inability to retain our key management employees, or attract and retain additional qualified management employees, could have a negative impact on us. we could be adversely affected by a failure or disruption of our computer, communications or other technology systems. we are heavily and increasingly dependent on technology to operate our business. the computer and communications systems on which we rely could be disrupted due to various events, some of which are beyond our control, including natural disasters, power failures, terrorist attacks, equipment failures, software failures and computer viruses and hackers. we have taken certain steps to help reduce the risk of some but not all of these potential disruptions. there can be no assurance, however, that the measures we have taken are adequate to prevent or remedy disruptions or failures of these systems. any substantial or repeated failure of these systems could impact our operations and customer service, result in the loss of important data, loss of revenues, and increased costs, and generally harm our business. moreover, a failure of certain of our vital systems could limit our ability to operate our flights for an extended period of time, which would have a material adverse impact on our operations and our business. we are at risk of losses and adverse publicity which might result from an accident involving any of our aircraft. if one of our aircraft were to be involved in an accident, we could be exposed to significant tort liability. the insurance we carry to cover damages arising from any future accidents may be inadequate. in the event that our insurance is not adequate, we may be forced to bear substantial losses from an accident. in addition, any accident involving an aircraft operated by us could adversely affect the public s perception of us. 